# 13022 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Laurentian-Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forest - Hemlock {#laurentian-acadian-northern-hardwoods-forest---hemlock .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                              **Reviewers**   
  ---------------- ------------------------ --------------- ----------------
  Beverly Braden   bbraden@consultant.com   Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  David Price      priced1@michigan.gov     None            None

  None             None                     None            None
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Reviewed by:** Ron Deckert and Greg Nowacki, plus staff from
Chequamegon-Nicholet National Forest.

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

41, 50, 51

Model Splits or Lumps

This Biophysical Setting (BpS) is split into multiple models.
Laurentian-Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forest (BpS 1302) was split into
three models: 511302-1-Laurentian Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forest,
511302-2-Laurentian-Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forest - Hemlock, and
511302-3-Northern Sugar Maple-Basswood Forest.

Due to mapping challenges and further review, 13021 was lumped into this
BpS, 13022 during the 2017 BpS review

Geographic Range

This system occurs throughout the Northern Lower and especially the
western Upper Peninsulas of Michigan and northern Wisconsin and
Minnesota. In map zone (MZ) 51, this system would have occurred in 212
Hf, Hi, He, Hd, Ha, Jo, Jb, Sn, Sb, Sq, and Sc.

Biophysical Site Description

Commonly occurs on coarse-textured ground and end moraines lying
predominantly north of the tension zone. Also occurs on thin glacial
till over bedrock and medium-textured moraines and locally on
kettle-kame topography (Cohen 2000). Dominant soil texture is sandy
loam. May have silt cap.

Vegetation Description

Structurally, these uneven-aged forests were characterized by large
volumes of coarse, woody debris lying beneath multi-storied canopies of
different-aged cohorts, with supercanopies composed of trees centuries
old (Tyrell and Crow 1994). The dominant tree species are among the most
moisture- and nutrient-demanding species in the eastern United States
(Woods 2000; Whitney 1986). Hemlock diminished in the southern and
western parts of this BpS. Some areas would have been dominated by
hemlock, yellow birch, and eastern white cedar. Beech restricted to
easternmost part of MZ.

Composition of the ground flora and understory varies along a
moisture-nutrient gradient and typically consists of high densities of
shade-tolerant tree species and mesophilic herbaceous species including
blue cohosh, yellow violet, sweet cicely, various ferns, and ginseng. In
hemlock-dominated stands, ground layer diversity is low due to the
nutrient-poor and acidic mor humus as well as the low understory light
intensity caused by the perpetually dense hemlock canopy (Curtis 1959).

Sugar maple, hemlock, yellow birch, balsam fir, cedar in swales, spruce,
and beech were the dominant late-successional species recorded along
section lines by GLO surveyors in Michigan. Conifer-dominated mesic
northern forests usually have hemlock and yellow birch as the primary
canopy components. Often present in these stands are white cedar and
large, but widely spaced white pine, relics of an earlier successional
stage generated by forest fire and/or windthrow (Nichols 1935). Large
openings likely occurred on \<1% of the landscape.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ACSA3        *Acer saccharum*                 Sugar maple

  TSUGA        *Tsuga*                          Hemlock

  BEAL2        *Betula alleghaniensis*          Yellow birch

  PIST         *Pinus strobus*                  Eastern white pine

  ABBA         *Abies balsamea*                 Balsam fir

  POTR5        *Populus tremuloides*            Quaking aspen

  BEPA         *Betula papyrifera*              Paper birch
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Catastrophic windthrow is an important yet infrequent component of the
disturbance regime of the northern mesic forests. Because of the long
rotation period of large-scale disturbance in this community type,
several generations of trees can pass between catastrophes. The
principal mechanisms for large-scale windthrow are tornadoes and
downbursts from thunderstorms. These wind-driven ecosystems historically
changed slowly over centuries due to fine-scale blowdowns, relatively
rare broad-scale catastrophic storms, and even rarer fire events
(Cleland et al. 2004; Woods 2000; Canham and Loucks 1984; Frelich and
Lorimer 1991; Grimm 1984; Runkle 1982). Fine-scale or gap-dynamic
windthrow events were modeled as Optional1, with \~5-20% of canopy trees
dying per decade and creating gaps of tens to a few hundred square
meters (Woods 2004). Frelich et al. (1993) proposed that unless followed
by catastrophic fire, catastrophic windthrow would cause little change
in species composition because of the prevalence of advanced
regeneration of shade-tolerant species. Blowdowns affected conifers more
than hardwoods and older trees more than younger trees (Foster and Boose
1992; Webb 1984). The coarse woody debris from blowdowns served as an
important feature affecting the regeneration of hemlock, by serving as
nurse logs. These forests seldom burned (Grimm 1984; Stearns 1949) and
exhibited a repeating and shifting steady state of fine-scaled mosaics
of species whose overall proportions remained essentially constant
(Borman and Likens 1979).

Fire Regime Description: Because this forest type was composed of
fire-sensitive species, fires only occurred within it following
catastrophic wind events or during periods of extreme drought. This fire
resistance is due to high rates of organic matter decomposition and low
rates of fuel accumulation, closed and multistoried canopy effects on
microclimate, succulent ground-flora and herbaceous layers, high
soil-moisture storage capacity, and the dispersed canopies of volatile
coniferous foliage within a fire-resistant deciduous hardwood matrix.
The principal cause of fuel formation leading to fire in northern
hardwood ecosystems is broad-scale, storm-driven windthrow of
catastrophic proportions (Canham and Loucks 1984; Dunn et al. 1983;
Runkle 1982). Canham and Loucks (1984) estimated the return interval for
catastrophic storms to be \~1200yrs in northern Wisconsin. Their
comparisons of the pre-settlement disturbance regime with contemporary
climatological records suggest that catastrophic thunderstorms were the
principal mechanism for large-scale windthrow, followed by tornadoes
that accounted for one-third of blowdown recorded by surveyors. Not only
were these storms nearly stand-replacing events in themselves, but after
the slash resulting from them cured, the probability of fire increased
exponentially. However, fires within undisturbed, intact systems that
did start or that moved into these stands from adjacent areas tended to
smolder in the duff layer and move very slowly, eventually going out and
causing little damage to the overstory (Frelich and Lorimer 1991;
Stearns 1949).

Within the 5.8 million acres of northern hardwood ecosystems in the
Upper Peninsula of Michigan, there were 146,028ac of blown-down forests
and 54,903ac of burned areas based on analyses of General Land Office
survey notes recorded between 1840-1855 (Cleland et al. 2004a; Maclean
and Cleland 2003). Assuming a 15yr recognition window, the historical
fire rotation was 1,568yrs. If surveyors recognized a blowdown 20yrs
after the event, catastrophic wind rotations would have been 786yrs,
with a 30yr recognition window estimate of 1179yrs. Because of the fire
resistance of undisturbed mesic deciduous forests, these estimates
suggest that \~40% of the blown-down areas within this forest type in
the Upper Peninsula subsequently burned.

Fire Regime Group V is applicable to this system. Severe wind events
were assumed to reset mature stands on a \~1,100yr rotation in
Michigan's Upper Peninsula in the following VDDT models. Most
replacement fire occurs in slash created by these wind events. Forty
percent of the blowdown areas burn and revert to an open land or an
early-seral aspen-birch stage that lasts 60yrs. Replacement fires
without associated wind events are very rare.

From 2017 review:

Historically, most foresters/ecologists/researchers always assumed that
small-scale, autogenic (within-stand) disturbances drove the prevailing
"gap phase" dynamics of these systems. And to some degree they were
right. But that was before the emergence of dendroecology and the
identification of canopy disturbance events via tree-ring release.
Fairly recently, Dr. Craig Lorimer and his graduate students have done a
superb job documenting the importance of intermediate, partial-canopy
disturbance (wind) events in the development and maintenance of northern
hardwood forests. Instead of being "rare" events (sensu Woods 2004),
moderate-severity wind storm events appear to be relatively common in
this forest type (Hanson and Lorimer 2007). Hanson and Lorimer (2007; p.
1326) state: "Most remnant old-growth stands of the northeastern United
States have experienced several episodes of moderate damage from wind,
fire, insect outbreaks, and other disturbances (Hough and Forbes 1943;
Oliver and Stephens 1977; Foster 1988a; Abrams and Orwig 1996; Orwig et
al. 2001; Ziegler 2002; Fraver and White 2005). In northern hardwood
forest of upper Michigan, disturbances removing 30-60% of the forest
canopy had estimated rotation periods of 300-390 years, or about once
during the expected lifespan of an individual cohort. Irregular,
multi-cohort forests consequently dominated about 80% of the landscape
(Frelich 1986; Frelich and Lorimer 1991a,b). Moderate-severity wind
events have unique impacts on forest composition and structure that
differ from small gap-phase dynamics (i.e., things come in pulses)
(Woods 2004; Hanson and Lorimer 2007). As such, classic models of forest
development/succession do a poor job capturing the more complex and
unpredictable trajectories representative of periodic moderate-severity
events. Most stands are probably multi-cohort in age structure rather
than purely uneven-aged (Oliver and Larson 1996), with moderate-severity
wind events causing partial retrogression of stand structure that
differs substantially from complete stand replacement or continuous
small gap-phase dynamics (Hanson and Lorimer 2007). Moreover, the
maintenance of yellow birch (*Betula alleghaniensis*) in these systems
might be predicated on moderate-severity wind events. Please refer to
Halpin and Lorimer (2016) for how they incorporated moderate-severity
wind events into their modelled trajectories.

New research on the pine component: In regard to pine as an associate in
these systems or as the dominant conifer in pine-northern hardwoods,
there is increasing evidence that fire was an important driver. Fahay
(another Lorimer grad student) has recently produced a number of good
works documenting pine dynamics within northern hardwood systems (Fahay
et al. 2012; Fahay and Lorimer 2013, 2014a, 2014b).

General consensus is that fire may have occurred more than we originally
thought. The model was adjusted accordingly. Additionally, the model was
adjusted to capture the thinking that wind would occur on roughly 2-5%
of the landscape annually.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

None

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Large areas of red pine and white pine occur on sandy, drier soils
adjacent to this type. Embedded within this Northern Hardwood-Hemlock
forest are lowland complexes. Similar BpSs are mesic maple-beech-hemlock
forest and maple-basswood. The maple-basswood forest type is usually
associated with more nutrient-rich and moisture-rich sites.

BpSs adjacent to this system include 1310 (North-Central Interior
Dry-Mesic Oak Forest and Woodland), 1311 (North-Central Interior Dry Oak
Forest and Woodland), 1344 (Boreal Jack Pine-Black Spruce Forest), and
1345 (Boreal White Spruce forest and Woodland).

This system can be easily confused with 1314 (North-Central Interior
Maple Basswood Forest) and 1362 (Laurentian-Acadian Northern
Pine-\[Oak\] Forest).

Issues or Problems

Exotics and invasives such as earthworms, garlic mustard, European
buckthorn, and honey suckle occur presently but would not have affected
this system historically. Encroachment in the form of conversion, urban
sprawl, and management practices (forestry and fire suppression) are
effects that would not have impacted this system historically but occur
in the present day.

As a result of the forest management practices in the late 1800s, the
majority of today\'s forests are second growth. In terms of structure
and composition, this system is much simpler in present day, lacking
shrub species such as Canada yew, and the successional stages tend to be
younger, resulting in a second-growth forest. The presence of exotics
and invasives in the present-day forest should also be noted.

It is possible that the replanting efforts by the Civilian Conservation
Core (CCC) in the 1930s have converted some of this system to red pine
monoculture.

This type has been in decline due to heavy winter browse by deer, single
tree selection, which in some areas has greatly simplified this type,
and reduction in microtopography from management style \-- there are
fewer trees blowing down, resulting in fewer tip-up mounds and nurse
logs.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Maple monocultures. See Issues and Problems above.

Comments

Modified from Rapid Asessment (RA) Model R6NHHEgl created by Dave
Cleland (dcleland@fs.fed.us), Jim Merzenich (jmerzenich@fs.fed.us), and
Linda Parker (lparker@fs.fed.us).

Kuchler typed the Wisconsin portion as Northern Hardwoods but the Upper
Peninsula portion as Northern Hardwood-Fir. We based this description on
the FRCC Northern Hardwood-Fir description document. At the Great Lakes
RA workshop, it was agreed to rename as Northern Hardwood-Hemlock Forest
(Great Lakes). Suggested reviewers: Eric Epstein (WDNR Natural Heritage
Ecologist), Randy Hoffman (WDNR Natural Areas program), Eunice Padley
(WDNR Div of Forestry), Mike Kost (Mich NFI), and John Almendinger (MN
DNR).

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 1 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class A contains early-seral stands characterized by aspen and paper
birch.

It occurs due to the combination of blowdown followed by fire. Aspen and
paper birch start dying off as they are attacked by disease and they
cannot reproduce in the shade. Species in Class B are in the understory
such as maples (later), white pine/yellow birch (early). Paper birch
will last longer than aspen.

A blowdown here simply resets the age, with aspens and birches
resprouting. Other species may include red maple, white pine, and black
cherry.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Seedling \<4.5ft

Class B 4 Early Development 2 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- -------------------- ------------------
  BEAL2        Betula alleghaniensis  Yellow birch         Upper

  ACSA3        Acer saccharum         Sugar maple          Middle

  PIST         Pinus strobus          Eastern white pine   Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch          Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana L.     American Basswood    Middle
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class B contains regenerating stands dominated by mid-tolerant northern
hardwood species. Windthrow of mature stands (without subsequent fire)
generally results in this class.

Yellow birch seeds need old nurse logs as they cannot germinate in maple
litter. White pine needs mineral soil, so it will not germinate in later
stages unless there is a tip-up mounds.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\" DBH

Class C 14 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  ACSA3        Acer saccharum         Sugar maple         Upper

  TSUGA        Tsuga                  Hemlock             Low-Mid

  BEAL2        Betula alleghaniensis  Yellow birch        Upper

  PIST         Pinus strobus          Eastern white pine  Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana L.     American Basswood   Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class C contains mid-aged mixed hardwood-conifer stands.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\" DBH

Class D 77 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  ACSA3        Acer saccharum         Sugar maple         Upper

  TSUGA        Tsuga                  Hemlock             Upper

  BEAL2        Betula alleghaniensis  Yellow birch        Upper

  PIST         Pinus strobus          Eastern white pine  Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana L.     American Basswood   Middle
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class represents old late-seral forests and the end point of
succession. Sugar maple, hemlock, and yellow birch are co-dominants. A
white pine component is common, especially in the supercanopy.

White pines would occur in the later stages only on tip-ups. With
blowdowns, the small maples can suffer terminal leader death from
freezing since they do not have the canopy to protect them. Maples can
grow in the shadows of maples.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\" DBH

Class E 4 Mid Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ --------------------- --------------------- ------------------
  POTR5        Populus tremuloides   Quaking aspen         Upper

  ACSA3        Acer saccharum        Sugar maple           Mid-Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana       American basswood     Mid-Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera     Paper birch           Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class E represents transition from fire response, early successional
stands.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Bormann, F.H. and Likens, G.E., 1979. Catastrophic disturbance and the
steady state in northern hardwood forests. American Scientist. 67:
660-669.

Canham, C.D. and Loucks, O.L., 1984. Catastrophic windthrow in the
presettlement forests of Wisconsin. Ecology 65: 803-809.

Cleland, D.T., S.C. Saunders, T.R. Crow, D.I. Dickmann, A.L. Maclean,
J.K. Jordan, R.L. Watson, and A.M. Sloan, 2004. Characterizing
historical and modern fire regimes in the Lake States: a landscape
ecosystem approach. Landscape Ecology 19: 311--325.

Cohen, J.G. 2000. Natural community abstract for mesic northern forest.
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 8 pp.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Davis, M.B., Sugita, S., Calcote, R.R., Ferrari, J.B. and Frelich, L.E.
1994. Historical development of alternate communities in a hemlock
hardwood forest in northern Michigan, U.S.A. In Large Scale Ecology and
Conservation Biology: The 35th Symposium of the British Ecological
Society with the Society for Conservation Biology, pp. 19-39. Edited by
P.J. Edwards, R.M. May and N.R. Webb. University of Southampton.
Blackwell Scientific Publications: Boston, MA.

Dunn, Christopher P., Guntenspergen, Glenn R. and Dorney, John R. 1983.
Catastrophic wind disturbance in and old-growth hemlock-hardwood forest,
Wisconsin. Canadian Journal of Botany. 61:211-217. - 5 -NHFI (December
2004).doc

Fahey, R.T. and Lorimer, C.G., 2013. Restoring a midtolerant pine
species as a component of late-successional forests: Results of
gap-based planting trials. Forest Ecology and Management, 292,
pp.139-149.

Fahey, R.T. and Lorimer, C.G., 2014a. Persistence of pine species in
late‐successional forests: evidence from habitat‐related variation in
stand age structure. Journal of vegetation science, 25(2), pp.584-600.

Fahey, R.T. and Lorimer, C.G., 2014b. Habitat associations and 150 years
of compositional change in white pine-hemlock-hardwood forests based on
resurvey of public land survey corners. Journal of the Torrey Botanical
Society, 141(4), pp.277-293.

Fahey, R.T., Lorimer, C.G. and Mladenoff, D.J., 2012. Habitat
heterogeneity and life-history traits influence presettlement
distributions of early-successional tree species in a late-successional,
hemlock-hardwood landscape. Landscape ecology, 27(7), pp.999-1013.

Foster, David R. and Boose, Emery R., 1992. Patterns of forest damage
resulting from catastrophic wind in central New England, USA. Journal of
Ecology. 80: 79-98.

Frelich, L.E. and Lorimer C.G. 1991. Natural disturbance regimes in
hemlock hardwood forests of the Upper Great Lakes Region. Ecological
Monographs 61(2): 159-162.

Frelich, L.E., R.R. Calcote, M.B. Davis and J. Pastor. 1993. Patch
formation and maintenance in an old-growth hemlock-hardwood forest.
Ecology 74: 513-527.

Grimm, E.C. 1984. Fire and other factors controlling the Big Woods
vegetation of Minnesota in the mid-Nineteenth century. Ecological
Monographs 54: 291-311.

Halpin, C.R. and Lorimer, C.G., 2016. Trajectories and resilience of
stand structure in response to variable disturbance severities in
northern hardwoods. Forest Ecology and Management, 365, pp.69-82.

Hanson, J.J. and Lorimer, C.G., 2007. Forest structure and light regimes
following moderate wind storms: Implications for multi‐cohort
management. Ecological applications, 17(5), pp.1325-1340.

Maclean, Ann L. and David T. Cleland, 2003. Determining the spatial
extent of historical fires with geostatistics in northern Lower
Michigan. In: Fire, fuel treatments, and ecological restoration.
Conference proceedings; 2002 April 16-18. Omi, Philip N.; Joyce, Linda
A., tech. eds. Fort Collins, CO. Proc. RMRS-P-29. Fort Collins, CO:
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station. Pages 289-300.

Muzika, R.M., Guyette, R.P., Stambaugh, M.C. and Marschall, J.M., 2015.
Fire, drought, and humans in a heterogeneous Lake Superior landscape.
Journal of sustainable forestry, 34(1-2), pp.49-70.

Nichols, G.E. 1935. The hemlock-white pine-northern hardwood region of
Eastern North America. Ecology 16: 403-422.

Oliver, C.D. and Larson, B.C., 1996. Forest stand dynamics: updated
edition. John Wiley and sons.

Runkle, James Reade, 1982. Patterns of disturbance in some old growth
mesic forests of eastern North America. Ecology. 63(5): 1533-1546.

Sloan, T.M. Scupien, T.R. Crow and D.I. Dickmann. 2004a. Ongoing project
to determine historical and modern wind and fire regimes, fire risk, and
historical landscape and community composition and structure in the Lake
States and R-9 National Forests.

Stearns, F.W. 1949. Ninety years change in a northern hardwood forest in
Wisconsin. Ecology 30:350-358.

Tyrell, L.E. and T.R. Crow. 1994. Structural characteristics of
old-growth hemlock-hardwood forests in relation to age. Ecology 75:
370-386.

USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences
Laboratory (2002, December). Fire Effects Information.

Webb, S.L. 1989. Contrasting windstorm consequences in two forests,
Itasca State Park, Minnesota. Ecology. 70(4): 1167-1180.

White, P.S. and Pickett, S.T.A., 1985. Natural disturbance and patch
dynamics: An introduction. In The Ecology of Natural Disturbance and
Patch Dynamics, pp. 3-13. Edited by S.T.A. Pickett and P.S. White.
Academic Press: New York, NY.

Whitney, G.G. 1986. Relation of Michigan\'s presettlement pine forests
to substrate and disturbance history. Ecology 67(6): 1548-1559.

Woods, K.D. 2000. Long-term change and spatial pattern in a
late-successional hemlock-northern hardwood forest. Journal of Ecology
88: 267-282.

Woods, K.D., 2004. Intermediate disturbance in a late‐successional
hemlock‐northern hardwood forest. Journal of Ecology, 92(3), pp.464-476.
