# 13023 {#section .BpS_Title}

**Laurentian-Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forest - Northern Sugar
Maple-Basswood**

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                              **Reviewers**   
  --------------- ------------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Peggy Burkman   peggy_burkman@nps.gov     Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  Doug Pearsall   dpearsall@tnc.org         Bredan Ward     bward@fs.fed.us

  Brad Slaughter  slaughterb@michigan.gov   None            None
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51

Model Splits or Lumps

This BpS is split into multiple models:

Laurentian-Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forest (BpS 1302) was split into
two models: 1302-2 Laurentian Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forests-Hemlock
and 1302-3-Laurentian-Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forest - Northern Sugar
Maple-Basswood.

Geographic Range

This system occurs in western Upper Peninsula of MI, in Subsections
212Tb, 212Ya, 212Jb, 212Sq, 212Jo and 212Sn.

Biophysical Site Description

This type occurs principally on moraines of coarse and fine texture, on
lacustrine silts and clays, and on medium-textured till over bedrock \--
areas of consistent moisture and nutrient availability that are
protected from fire. Typical sites are buffered from seasonal drought by
fine-textured moisture-retaining soils or dense subsoil layers.
Essential nutrients are mineralized from decaying organic matter at
twice the rate of that in fire-dependent forest or wet forest
communities.

Vegetation Description

This system is a mixture of mesophyllic hardwood species and is typified
by Acer saccharum, Tilia americana, Fagus grandifolia (restricted to
MZ51 and eastern MZ50), Betula allegheniensis and Ulmus americana.
Populus tremuloides, Populus grandidentata and Betula papyrifera are
early seral species in this system. Acer rubrum and Abies balsamea
occasional species found in mid-seral stands, especially on less
productive soils. Occasional Pinus strobus individuals were present in
early and mid-seral stands that were in proximity to seed sources, but
their presence in contemporary forests likely indicates a site that
would have formerly been occupied more strongly by pine under the
natural disturbance regime. Tsuga canadensis was an occasional
late-seral species on more poor soils; however, its presence today
likely suggests that the Laurentian-Acadian Pine-Hemlock-Hardwood Forest
is a more appropriate BpS.

Structurally, these uneven-aged forests were characterized by large
volumes of coarse structurally complex woody debris arranged both
vertically and horizontally beneath multi-storied canopies of
different-aged cohorts, with super canopies composed of trees centuries
old (Tyrell and Crow 1994). The dominant tree species are among the most
moisture and nutrient-demanding species in the eastern US, and their
distribution is confined to glacial landforms underlain by fertile soils
(Woods 2000, Whitney 1986). Composition of the ground flora and
understory varies along a moisture-nutrient gradient, and typically
consists of high densities of shade-tolerant tree species and mesophilic
herbaceous species including blue cohosh, yellow violet, sweet cicely,
various ferns and ginseng. The shrub layer includes Canada yew, beaked
hazel, moose wood and Amelanchier species.

In the mid-1800s, there were 5.8 million acres of northern hardwood
ecosystems in the Upper Peninsula of MI (Cleland et al. 2003). Sugar
maple, hemlock, yellow birch, balsam fir, cedar in swales, spruce and
beech were the dominant late-successional species recorded along section
lines by GLO surveyors. Early-successional aspen and white birch
comprised only two percent of the GLO line trees. Large openings likely
occurred on less than one percent of the landscape.

In the mid-1800's, there were 8.4 million acres of northern hardwood
ecosystems within the 17.8 million acres of forest lands in northern WI
(Cleland et al. 2003). Yellow birch, sugar maple, hemlock, white pine,
elm and basswood were the dominant late-successional species.
Early-successional aspen, white birch and oak species comprised 4.8% of
the GLO corner trees. Large openings likely occurred on less than one
percent of the landscape.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ACSA3        *Acer saccharum*                 Sugar maple

  TIAM         *Tilia americana*                American basswood

  BEAL2        *Betula alleghaniensis*          Yellow birch

  ULAM         *Ulmus americana*                American elm

  TSCA         *Tsuga canadensis*               Eastern hemlock

  PRSE2        *Prunus serotina*                Black cherry

  FAGR         *Fagus grandifolia*              American beech
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

These wind-driven ecosystems historically changed slowly over centuries
due to fine-scale blowdowns, relatively rare broad-scale catastrophic
storms, and even rarer fire events (Cleland et al. 2004, Woods 2000,
Frelich and Lorimer 1991, Canham and Loucks 1984, Grimm 1984, Runkle
1982). Blowdowns affected conifers more than hardwoods, and older trees
more than younger trees (Foster and Boose 1992, Webb 1989). These
"asbestos" forests seldom burned (Grimm 1984, Stearns 1949), and
exhibited a repeating and shifting steady state of fine-scaled mosaics
of species whose overall proportions remained essentially constant
(Borman and Likens 1979).

Fire Regime Description: Composed of fire-sensitive species, fires only
occurred within this forest type following catastrophic wind events or
during periods of extreme drought. This fire-resistance is due to high
rates of organic matter decomposition and low rates of fuel
accumulation, closed and multistoried canopy effects on microclimate,
succulent ground-flora and herbaceous layers, high soil moisture storage
capacity, and the dispersed canopies of volatile coniferous foliage
within a fire-resistant deciduous hardwood matrix. The principal cause
of fuel formation leading to fire in northern hardwood ecosystems is
broad scale, storm-driven windthrow of catastrophic proportions (Canham
and Loucks 1984, Dunn et al. 1983, Runkle 1982). Canham and Loucks
(1984) estimated the return interval for catastrophic storms to be about
1,200yrs in northern Wisconsin. Their comparisons of the presettlement
disturbance regime with contemporary climatological records suggest that
catastrophic thunderstorms were the principal mechanism for large-scale
windthrow, followed by tornadoes that accounted for one-third of
blowdown recorded by surveyors. Not only were these storms nearly
stand-replacing events in themselves, but after the slash resulting from
them cured, the probability of fire increased exponentially. However,
fires within undisturbed, intact systems that did start or that moved
into these stands from adjacent areas tended to smolder in the duff
layer and move very slowly, eventually going out and causing little
damage to the overstory (Frelich and Lorimer 1991, Stearns 1949).

Within the 5.8 million acres of northern hardwood ecosystems in the
Upper Peninsula of Michigan, there were 146,028ac of blown down forests
and 54,903 acres of burned areas based on analyses of General Land
Office survey notes recorded between 1840 and 1855 (Cleland et al.
2004a, Maclean and Cleland 2003). Assuming a 15yr recognition window,
the historical fire rotation was 1568yrs. If surveyors recognized a
blow-down 20yrs after the event, catastrophic wind rotations would have
been 786yrs, with a 30yr recognition window estimate of 1179yrs. Because
of the fire-resistance of undisturbed mesic deciduous forests, these
estimates suggest that approximately 40% of the blown-down areas within
this forest type in the Upper Peninsula subsequently burned.

Within the 8.4 million acres of northern hardwood ecosystems in northern
Wisconsin, there were 396,485ac of blown-down forests and 61,800 acres
of burned areas based on analyses of General Land Office survey notes
recorded between 1840 and 1855 (Cleland et al. 2004a). Assuming a 15yr
recognition window, the historical fire rotation was 2039yrs. If
surveyors recognized a blow-down 20yrs after the event, catastrophic
wind rotations would have been 425yrs, with a 30yr recognition window
estimate of 637yrs. Because of the fire-resistance of undisturbed mesic
deciduous forests, these estimates suggest that approximately 16% of the
blown-down areas in this forest type in WI subsequently burned. WI's
northern hardwood communities experienced more wind and less fire
disturbance than those in MI's Upper Peninsula. Although wind rotations
differed across the two-state area, fire rotations for northern
hardwoods were uniformly very long, ranging from 1400 to more than
2000yrs.

Fire Regime Group V is applicable to this system. Severe wind events
were assumed to reset mature stands on an approximate 1100yr rotation in
MI's Upper Peninsula in the following VDDT models. Most replacement fire
occurs in slash created by these wind events. Forty percent of the
blowdown areas burn and revert to an open land or an early-seral
aspen-birch stage that lasts 60yrs. Replacement fires without associated
wind events are very rare.

Insects and disease are present but in a very minor way most likely
affecting individual trees versus at a stand level. As an example root
and stem rot cause individual tree mortality primarily in late
development. These types of disturbances would likely contribute to
higher fuel loads and structural complexity of stands.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

This type is a large patch or small patch system within the dominant
BpS, northern hardwood - hemlock, across northern MN, northern WI and
the western Upper Peninsula of MI.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

This type is mostly embedded within the Northern Hardwood-Hemlock forest
and occurs as small to large patches, associated with Sugar Maple -
Hemlock and Sugar Maple - Yellow Birch cover types\--the latter being
primarily in Subsection 212Jc and 212Xc. The maple-basswood forest type
is usually associated with more nutrient-rich and moisture-rich sites.

Issues or Problems

In the course-scale assessment, this type was called Northern Hardwoods
(#51). Kuchler (1964) typed the WI portion as Northern Hardwoods, but
the UP portion as Northern Hardwood-Fir. We based this description on
the FRCC Northern Hardwood-Fir description document.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

Prior to LANDFIRE Remap this BpS was named Northern Sugar Maple-Basswood
Forest.

This model is adapted from LANDFIRE Model 511302-3 Northern
Sugar-Maple-Basswood Forest by Doug Pearsall (dpearsall@tnc.org) and
Brad Slaughter (slaughterb@michigan.gov). Model 511302-3 was based on
Rapid Assessment Model created by Cleland, Merzenich and Parker for
biophysical setting R6NHHEgl, \"Northern Hardwood-Hemlock Forest (Great
Lakes)\". The LANDFIRE Model 511302-3 also used Rapid Assessment Model
R6MBMHW as a basis for much of its characterization. In the MZ51
assessment, we are considering this type to be a large-patch system
within a matrix of hemlock-northern hardwoods.

Comments from Rapid Assessment: In the course-scale assessment, this
type was called Northern Hardwoods (#51). Kuchler typed the Wisconsin
portion as Northern Hardwoods, but the UP portion as Northern
Hardwood-Fir. We based this description on the FRCC Northern
Hardwood-Fir description document. At the Great Lakes Rapid Assessment
workshop it was agreed to rename as Northern Hardwood-Hemlock Forest
(Great Lakes). Suggested reviewers: Eric Epstein (WDNR Natural Heritage
Ecologist, Randy Hoffman (WDNR Natural Areas program), Eunice Padley
(WDNR Div of Forestry), Mike Kost (Mich NFI), John Almendinger (MN DNR).

Need review from Minnesota experts to include occurance of this BpS in
MZ41. Suggested reviewers are Dave Cleland and Paul Tine.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 4 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class A contains early-seral stands characterized by aspen and paper
birch. It occurs due to the combination of blowdown followed by fire.
Forty percent of blowdown areas burn and revert to this class.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class B 7 Early Development 2 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                            Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- --------------------- -----------------
  ACSA3        Acer saccharum         Sugar maple           Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana        American basswood     Upper

  BEAL2        Betula alleghaniensis  Yellow birch          Upper

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen         Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class B contains regenerating stands dominated by mid-tolerant northern
hardwood species. Windthrow of mature stands (without subsequent fire)
generally results in this class. Includes a combination of new recruits
and sprouts.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class C 16 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                            Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- --------------------- -----------------
  ACSA3        Acer saccharum         Sugar maple           Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana        American basswood     Upper

  BEAL2        Betula alleghaniensis  Yellow birch          Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class C contains mid-aged stands dominated by sugar maple and basswood.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 69 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ --------------------- -------------------- -----------------
  ACSA3        Acer saccharum        Sugar maple          Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana       American basswood    Upper

  BEAL2        Betula alleghaniensis Yellow birch         Upper

  TSUGA        Tsuga                 Hemlock              Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class D represents old late-seral forests and the end point of
succession. These stands are greater than 150yrs old. Sugar maple and
basswood are co-dominants, with yellow birch, American elm, white ash
and hemlock occasional.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\"DBH

Class E 4 Mid Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ --------------------- --------------------- ------------------
  POTR5        Populus tremuloides   Quaking aspen         Upper

  ACSA3        Acer saccharum        Sugar maple           Mid-Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana       American basswood     Mid-Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera     Paper birch           Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class E represents transition from fire response, early successional
stands to mid-successional maple-basswood stands.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Bormann, F.H. and Likens, G.E. 1979. Catastrophic disturbance and the
steady state in northern hardwood forests. American Scientist. 67:
660-669.

Braun, E.L. 1950. Deciduous Forests of Eastern North America. Blackburn
Press. 596 pp.

Canham, C.D. and Loucks, O.L. 1984. Catastrophic windthrow in the
presettlement forests of Wisconsin. Ecology. 65: 803-809.

Cleland, D.T., S.C. Saunders, T.R. Crow, D.I. Dickmann, A.L. Maclean,
J.K. Jordan, R.L. Watson and A.M. Sloan. 2004. Characterizing historical
and modern fire regimes in the Lake States: a landscape ecosystem
approach. Landscape Ecology. 19: 311--325.

Cleland, D.T., S.C. Saunders, K.M. Brosofske, A.L. Maclean, J.K. Jordan,
R.L. Watson, A.M. Sloan, T.M. Scupien, T.R. Crow and D.I. Dickmann.
2003. Ongoing project to determine historical and modern wind and fire
regimes, fire risk, and historical landscape and community composition
and structure in the Lake States and R-9 National Forests. North Central
Research Station of the USDA Forest Service.

Davis, M.B., S. Sugita, R.R. Calcote, J.B. Ferrari and L.E. Frelich.
1994. Historical development of alternate communities in a hemlock
hardwood forest in northern Michigan, USA. In Large Scale Ecology and
Conservation Biology: The 35th Symposium of the British Ecological
Society with the Society for Conservation Biology, 19-39. Edited by P.J.
Edwards, R.M. May and N.R. Webb. University of Southampton. Blackwell
Scientific Publications: Boston, MA.

Dunn, Christopher P., Glenn R. Guntenspergen and John R. Dorney. 1983.
Catastrophic wind disturbance in an old-growth hemlock-hardwood forest,
Wisconsin. Canadian Journal of Botany. 61: 211-217.

Foster, David R. and Emery R. Boose. 1992. Patterns of forest damage
resulting from

catastrophic wind in central New England, USA. Journal of Ecology. 80:
79-98.

Frelich, L.E. and C.G. Lorimer. 1991. Natural disturbance regimes in
hemlock hardwood forests of the Upper Great Lakes Region. Ecological
Monographs. 61(2): 159-162.

Grimm, E.C. 1984. Fire and other factors controlling the Big Woods
vegetation of Minnesota in the mid-nineteenth century. Ecological
Monographs. 54: 291-311.

Maclean, A.L. and D.T. Cleland. 2003. Determining the spatial extent of
historical fires with geostatistics in northern Lower Michigan. In: Omi,
P.N. and L.A. Joyce, tech. eds. Fire, fuel treatments, and ecological
restoration conference proceedings, April 16-18 2002. Fort Collins, CO.
Proc. RMRS-P-29. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station: 289-300.

Runkle, James Reade. 1982. Patterns of disturbance in some old growth
mesic forests of eastern North America. Ecology. 63(5): 1533-1546.

Stearns, F.W. 1949. Ninety years change in a northern hardwood forest in
Wisconsin. Ecology. 30: 350-358.

Stearns, F.W. 1949. Ninety years of change in a northern hardwood forest
in Wisconsin. Ecology. 30: 350-358.

Tyrell, L.E. and T.R. Crow. 1994. Structural characteristics of
old-growth hemlock-hardwood forests in relation to age. Ecology. 75:
370-386.

Webb, S.L. 1989. Contrasting windstorm consequences in two forests,
Itasca State Park, Minnesota. Ecology. 70(4): 1167-1180.

White, P.S. and S.T.A. Pickett. 1985. Natural disturbance and patch
dynamics: an introduction. In: Pickett, S.T.A. and P.S. White, eds. The
Ecology of Natural Disturbance and Patch Dynamics. Academic Press, New
York, NY: 3-13.

Whitney, G.G. 1986. Relation of Michigan\'s presettlement pine forests
to substrate and

disturbance history. Ecology. 67(6): 1548-1559.

Woods, K.D. 2000. Long-term change and spatial pattern in a
late-successional hemlock-northern hardwood forest. Journal of Ecology.
88: 267-282.

USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences
Laboratory. Fire Effects Information. 2002, December.
