# 13100 {#section .BpS_Title}

# North-Central Interior Dry-Mesic Oak Forest and Woodland {#north-central-interior-dry-mesic-oak-forest-and-woodland .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 3/27/2018

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                            **Reviewers**   
  --------------- ----------------------- --------------- -----------------
  Jeff Lee        leejg@michigan.gov      Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  Michael Kost    kostma@michigan.gov     None            None

  None            None                    None            None
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51

Geographic Range

This system occurs throughout southern lower Michigan primarily in
Allegan, Barry, Cass, St. Joseph, Kalamazoo, Calhoun, Jackson,
Washtenaw, Wayne, Monroe, Livingston, Oakland, Macomb, Lapeer and St.
Clair counties. This encompasses Sections 222J and 222U (Cleland et al.
2007). Though occurring in all subsections, this system is most
prevalent in 222Jg, 222Jh, the far western and eastern ends of 222Jc,
222Jb, along coastal dunes of 222Ja, and in 222Ua and 222Ue.

Biophysical Site Description

This system occurs most commonly in the interlobate region of southern
Michigan where outwash, ice-contact and end moraine landforms are
situated between former glacial lobes. Other landforms suitable for
development of the dry-mesic oak forest are coarse ground moraine, sandy
lake plain and dunes. Common to all these landforms is well-drained,
acidic soil characterized by loamy sand and sandy loam. Dry landscape
settings, such as on western and southern aspects and upper slopes and
ridge tops are conducive to the development of this system. Native
Americans played a critical role in the development and maintenance of
oak-hickory landscapes through fire ignition. Natives burned these
landscapes for a variety of reasons. Fire encouraged open habitats
which, in turn, increased food-producing plants (forbs, mast) and
ungulate herbivores (meat). Also, lightning-strike ignitions, though
limited in frequency, would have provided an additional source of
ignition.

Vegetation Description

Typically, the vegetation consists of forests dominated by oaks,
especially white oak (*Quercus alba*), black oak (*Quercus velutina*)
and red oak (*Quercus rubra*). Along with oaks are varying amounts of
hickory (*Carya glabra* and *Carya ovata*), red maple (*Acer rubrum*),
black cherry (*Prunus serotina*) and sassafras (*Sassafras albidum*).
American chestnut (*Castanea dentata*) was once dominant or codominant
in the very southeastern portion of southern MI. Currently, due to
decades of fire suppression, subcanopies and shrub layersare
well-developed by witch-hazel (*Hamamelis virginiana*), flowering
dogwood (*Cornus florida*) and hop-hornbeam (*Ostrya virginiana*).
Common low woody shrubs include brambles (*Rubus* spp.), black currant
(*Ribes cynosbati*) and both native and invasive roses (*Rosa* spp.).
Graminoid species such as *Carex pensylvanica, Danthonia spicate,* and
*Andropogon gerardii* are also common.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  QUAL         *Quercus alba*                   White oak

  QUVE         *Quercus velutina*               Black oak

  CAGL8        *Carya glabra*                   Pignut hickory

  CAOV2        *Carya ovata*                    Shagbark hickory

  CADE12       *Castanea dentata*               American chestnut

  QURU         *Quercus rubra*                  Northern red oak

  ACRU         *Acer rubrum*                    Red maple

  SAAL5        *Sassafras albidum*              Sassafras
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

The North-Central Interior Dry-Mesic Oak Forest and Woodland
(oak-hickory forest) is predominantly Fire Regime I, characterized by
low-severity surface fires. Historically, indigenous fires accounted for
more than 95% of the ignitions over these landscapes. Vegetation types
varied based on fire frequency and intensity. Grassland prairies burned
often with fire rotations approximately less than five years and were
probably associated with flat-to-slightly rolling terrain that
effectively carried fire. These grasslands, deliberately maintained by
Native Americans for hunting purposes, were probably scattered
throughout the forest matrix. Oak-hickory grubs (tree-sprout and shrub
thickets) occurred where fire frequency was a bit less, probably
5-10yrs. Also, grub conditions would arise immediately after
catastrophic burns that would top-kill tree-dominated communities.
Savannas and woodlands developed within a moderate burning regime, with
fire return times averaging every 4-17yrs (Henderson and Long, 1984).
Closed-canopy oak-hickory forests would develop where fire return
intervals stretched beyond 15yrs. Shade-tolerant, fire-sensitive maples
(and associated late-successional trees) would regenerate and form
understories beneath oak-hickory canopies when fire was excluded over
several decades (25-40yrs). With continued fire exclusion, maple and
other late-successional species would gradually replace overstory oaks
and hickories through gap capture (Sutherland and Hutchinson 2003). A
mosaic of vegetation types comprised oak-hickory landscapes contingent
on fire history (Cutter and Guyette 1994). From a gross landscape
perspective, oak-hickory forests occurred in a contiguous matrix
integrated with oak savannas, grassland prairies, and mesic forests
dominated by red and sugar maple. Fire frequency and intensity
determined the proportion of each of these landscape ecosystems across
the landscape matrix. Historically, buffalo grazing would have similarly
maintained open conditions in very localized patches within savannas.
Currently, an overabundance of deer is limiting oak regeneration in
remnant oak forests in southern Michigan. Ice-damage, periodic insect
defoliation and the extinct passenger pigeon may have likely contributed
to increased oak canopy openings that facilitated light penetration to
the forest floor, and, ultimately, greater possibility of germination
and recruitment of oaks.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Pre-European oak-hickory forests covered hundreds of thousands of
contiguous acres. When considered as a matrix with savannas and
prairies, estimated acreage increases significantly.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Though often contiguous, oak-hickory patches are virtually always
integrated in the larger landscape scale with mesic maple-dominated
forests and dry oak savannas. Mesic maple forests were relegated to
those areas where fire was restricted through facilitation by an edaphic
factor such as heavy-textured soil or high water table or by natural
fire breaks such as bodies of water and slightly protected depressions.
Prolonged intervals (100-150yrs) without fire were needed for maples to
manifest their dominance. Oak-hickory forests also graded into savannas
(i.e., oak openings) when fire intervals shortened to the point where
woody regeneration of overstory tree species was limited. Exposed areas
where wind could carry flames at great distances tend to exhibit more
savanna vegetation structure than a close oak-hickory forest. In areas
where flat outwash extended beyond ice-contact terrain or end moraine,
savannas would typically occur in the former abutting a closed forest on
the latter landforms.

Currently, under the past century\'s practice of fire suppression,
oak-hickory forests are succeeding into a red maple-dominated forest.
Prolific sprouting ability, light, wind-carried fruits, and the tendency
to cast dense shade has enabled red maple to outcompete white and black
oak in these systems. Without fire as a natural disturbance that
prevents establishment of fire-sensitive species, mesophytic species are
free to invade and recruit into the overstory. Implications to forestry,
wildlife, and pest and disease outbreaks become apparent. Currently, an
overabundance of deer is limiting oak regeneration in remnant
oak-hickory forests in southern Michigan. Furthermore, invasive shrubs
such as autumn-olive, common buckthorn, multiflora rose and honeysuckle
rigorously compete against oaks in the low understory. Regeneration is
inhibited by such exotics, and changes in nutrient cycling may also
occur because some exotics are nitrogen fixers.

Issues or Problems

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Though present historically, red maple has been typified as the \"native
invasive\" in oak hickory forests. Its abundance in these systems
measured in both stem density and basal area has grown considerably due
to fire suppression and the marked increase in fire return interval.
Abundance of aspen, sassafras and black cherry can also be attributed to
fire suppression and poor silvicultural practices.

Comments

Comments from R6OAHI model: This model replaces the model R8OAKdm from
the Southern Appalachians model zone. This is a modification of the OKH4
FRCC model developed by Nowacki, Hutchinson, Iverson and Van-Gundy. We
added a pathway from class B to class E to represent a portion of the
landscape that is too moist to burn. Possible reviewers: Greg Nowacki,
Marc Abrams, Burton Barnes (bvb@umich.edu), Dennis Albert and Joshua
Cohen.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 3 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem      Upper

  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium          Little bluestem   Upper

  SONU2        Sorghastrum nutans     Indiangrass       Upper
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class A is grassland prairie maintained by frequently recurring fire.
Native Americans used these lands for hunting, and agriculture/native
plant gathering. If fire is absent for a few years, tree seedlings and
sprouts will establish and move the community to the mid-seral, open
stage. Heavy grazing, though unlikely to have large-scale impact, would
have kept certain patches from progressing to a woody shrub vegetation
stage and would have maintained the early-seral stage.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 7 Mid Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ --------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba          White oak          Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina      Black oak          Upper

  SAAL5        Sassafras albidum     Sassafras          Mid-Upper

  CAGL8        Carya glabra          Pignut hickory     Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This is an early tree regeneration (root and stump sprouts) phase.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class C 27 Mid Development 2 - Open

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak         Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak         Upper

  SAAL5        Sassafras albidum      Sassafras         Upper

  QUMA2        Quercus macrocarpa     Bur oak           Upper
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class is defined as oak-hickory savanna and woodland.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

Class D 61 Late Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**  **Common Name**      **Canopy Position**
  ------------ -------------------- -------------------- -------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba         White oak            Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina     Black oak            Upper

  QURU         Quercus rubra        Northern red oak     Upper

  CAGL8        Carya glabra         Pignut hickory       Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class D is defined as oak-hickory forest. Open understories of oak
seedlings exist. If the late-succession open forest type persists for
50yrs without any type of fire, it will convert to a late-succession
mixed mesophytic closed forest type. This conversion is a result of
species shift from dominant oaks to dominant maple, tulip tree, and
beech, which do not support fire as readily.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

Class E 2 Late Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific       **Common Name**        **Canopy Position**
               Name**                                    
  ------------ ------------------ ---------------------- -------------------
  ACRU         Acer rubrum        Red maple              Upper

  ACSA3        Acer saccharum     Sugar maple            Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana    American basswood      Upper

  QUAL         Quercus alba       White oak              Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Maple forests develop during the absence of fire. Dense understories of
shade-tolerant species develop.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Braun, E.L. 1950. Deciduous forests of eastern North America. Hafner
Publishing Company, New York, NY.

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Cutter, B.E. and R.P. Guyette, 1994. Fire history of an oak-hickory
ridge top in the Missouri Ozarks. American Midland Naturalist 132:
393-398.

Greller, A.M. 1988. Deciduous forest. Pages 288-316 in: M. G. Barbour
and W. D. Billings, editors. North American terrestrial vegetation.
Cambridge University Press, New York.

Henderson, N. R. and J.N. Long. 1984. A comparison of stand structure
and fire history in two black oak woodlands in northwestern Indiana.
Botanical Gazette 145: 222-228.

Schuler, T.M. and McClain, W.R., 2003. Fire history of a ridge and
valley oak forest. Newtown Square, PA, USDA Forest Service, Northeastern
Forest Service.

Sutherland, E.K., Hutchinson, T.F. and Yaussy, D.A., 2003. Introduction,
study area description, and experimental design (Chapter 1). Newtown
Square, PA, USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Research Station.
