# 13110 {#section .BpS_Title}

# North-Central Interior Dry Oak Forest and Woodland {#north-central-interior-dry-oak-forest-and-woodland .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 3/28/2018

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                            **Reviewers**   
  --------------- ----------------------- --------------- -----------------
  Jeff Lee        leejg@michigan.gov      Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  Michael Kost    kostma@michigan.gov     None            None

  None            None                    None            None
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51

Geographic Range

This system occurs throughout southern lower Michigan primarily in
Macomb, Oakland, Livingston, Washtenaw, Jackson, Hillsdale, Shiawassee,
St. Joseph, Kalamazoo, Barry, Kent, Montcalm and southern Newago
Counties (Comer 1995). This encompasses Sections 222J and 222U (Cleland
et al. 2007). This system occurs in 222Jg, 222Jh, 222Jc, 222Jb, 222Ja,
222Ua and 222Ue.

Biophysical Site Description

This system occurs most commonly in the interlobate region of southern
Michigan where outwash, ice-contact and end moraine landforms are
situated between former glacial lobes. Other landforms suitable for
development of the dry oak forest are sandy lake plain and dunes. Common
to all these landforms is somewhat excessively drained, acidic soil
characterized by sand and loamy sand. Dry landscape settings, such as on
western and southern aspects and upper slopes and ridge tops are
conducive to the development of this system. Dry-mesic oak-hickory
forests and dry mixed oak forests can occur in very similar landscape
settings. Slight differences in soil moisture holding capacity and pH
can often be the defining factor. Dry mixed oak forests tend to occupy
exposed kame tops and esker ridges in ice-contact terrain or on very
excessively drained, highly acidic soil on flat outwash plains or sand
lake plain. High exposure to desiccating wind and high solar radiation
also favors development of dry mixed oak forests over dry-mesic
oak-hickory forests. Soil texture of the former is usually no heavier
than a loamy sand, whereas soil of the latter can be as heavy as a sandy
clay loam in the lower pedon.

Furthermore, greater fire frequency historically may have selected for
more fire-tolerant oaks than hickories. Native Americans played a
critical role in the development and maintenance of mixed oak landscapes
through fire ignition. Natives burned these landscapes for a variety of
reasons. Fire encouraged open habitats which, in turn, increased
food-producing plants (forbs, mast) and ungulate herbivores (meat).
Also, lightning-strike ignitions, though limited in frequency, would
have provided an additional source of ignition.

Vegetation Description

Typically, the vegetation consists of forests dominated by oaks,
especially white oak (*Quercus alba*), black oak (*Quercus velutina*)
and northern pin oak (*Quercus ellipsoidalis*). Along with oaks are
pignut hickory (*Carya glabra*), red maple (*Acer rubrum*), black cherry
(*Prunus serotina*) and sassafras (*Sassafras albidum*). American
chestnut (*Castanea dentata*) was once dominant or codominant in the
very southeastern portion of southern Michigan. Currently, decades of
fire suppression have created subcanopies and shrub layers that are by
witch-hazel (*Hamamelis virginiana*), flowering dogwood (*Cornus
florida*) and hop-hornbeam (*Ostrya virginiana*). Common low woody
shrubs include brambles (*Rubus* spp.), black currant (*Ribes
cynosbati*) and both native and invasive roses (*Rosa* spp.). Graminoid
species such as *Carex pensylvanica, Danthonia spicata* and *Andropogon
gerardii* are also common. In the most acidic lake plain physiographic
systems, ericaceous shrubs such as wintergreen (*Gualtheria
procumbens*), lowbush blueberry (*Vaccinium angustifolium*), huckleberry
(*Gaylussacia baccata*) become common. Bracken fern (*Pteridium
aquilinum*) can be dominant in the most nutrient poor outwash and lake
plain landscapes.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  QUAL         *Quercus alba*                   White oak

  QUVE         *Quercus velutina*               Black oak

  QUEL         *Quercus ellipsoidalis*          Northern pin oak

  QUCO2        *Quercus coccinea*               Scarlet oak

  CAGL8        *Carya glabra*                   Pignut hickory

  CADE12       *Castanea dentata*               American chestnut

  SAAL5        *Sassafras albidum*              Sassafras

  PRSE2        *Prunus serotina*                Black cherry
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

The North-Central Interior Dry Oak Forest and Woodland fire regime is
predominantly characterized by low-severity surface fires, but
replacement fires would have also occurred at 35-200yrs frequency.
Historically, indigenous fires accounted for over 95% of the ignitions
over these landscapes. Vegetation types varied based on fire frequency
and intensity. Grassland prairies burned often with fire rotations as
frequent as annually and were probably associated with flat-to-slightly
rolling terrain that effectively carried fire. These grasslands,
deliberately maintained by Native Americans for hunting purposes, were
probably scattered throughout the forest matrix. Oak grubs (tree-sprout
and shrub thickets) occurred where fire frequency was a bit less,
probably 5-10yrs. Also, grub conditions would arise immediately after
catastrophic burns that would top-kill tree-dominated communities.
Savannas and woodlands developed within a moderate burning regime, with
fire return times averaging every 4-17yrs (Henderson and Long 1984).
Closed-canopy oak forests would develop where fire return intervals
stretched beyond 20-40yrs (Crow 1988). Shade-tolerant, fire-sensitive
maples (and associated late-successional trees) would regenerate and
form understories beneath oak canopies when fire was excluded over
several decades. With continued fire exclusion, maple and other
late-successional species would gradually replace overstory oaks through
gap capture (Sutherland and Hutchinson 2003). These shade-tolerant
species would eventually form layered stratums of differing heights that
will modify the microclimate and light environment to favor
self-replacement with exclusion of oaks. A mosaic of vegetation types
comprised oak landscapes contingent on fire history (Cutter and Guyette
1994). From a gross landscape perspective, oak forests occurred in a
contiguous matrix integrated with oak savannas, grassland prairies, and
mesic forests dominated by red and sugar maple. Fire frequency and
intensity determined the proportion of each of these landscape
ecosystems across the landscape matrix. Historically, buffalo grazing
would have similarly maintained open conditions in very localized
patches within savannas. Currently, an overabundance of deer is limiting
oak regeneration in remnant oak forests in southern Michigan.
Ice-damage, periodic insect defoliation and the extinct passenger pigeon
may have likely contributed to increased oak canopy openings that
facilitated light penetration to the forest floor, and, ultimately,
greater possibility of germination and recruitment of oaks.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Pre-European oak forests covered hundreds of thousands of contiguous
acres. When considered as a matrix with savannas and prairies, estimated
acreage increases significantly.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Though often contiguous, oak patches are virtually always integrated in
the larger landscape scale with mesic maple-dominated forests, dry-mesic
oak-hickory forests, and dry oak barrens. Mesic maple forests were
relegated to those areas where fire was restricted through facilitation
by an edaphic factor such as heavy-textured soil or high water table or
by natural fire breaks such as bodies of water and slightly protected
depressions. Prolonged intervals (100-150yrs) were needed for maples to
manifest their dominance. Dry-mesic oak-hickory forests often occurred
adjacent to dry oak forests, defined by a topographic position that had
more amenable well-drained soil, lower solar radiation, better moisture
conditions, and more protection from drying winds and recurring fires.
Lower slopes on north and east aspects were typical of oak-hickory
forests whereas ridge tops and upper slopes on south and west aspects
favored dry oak forests. Oak forests also graded into savannas and
barrens (i.e., oak openings) when fire intervals shortened to the point
where woody regeneration of overstory tree species was limited. Exposed
areas where wind could carry flames at great distances tend to exhibit
more savanna vegetation structure than a close oak forest. In areas
where flat outwash extended beyond ice-contact terrain or end moraine,
savannas would typically occur in the former abutting a closed forest on
the latter landforms. Fires often burned from a west to east direction
and stopped on the western edge of rivers (Gleason, 1913), leaving
eastern edges forested.

Currently, under the past century\'s practice of fire suppression, oak
forests are succeeding into a red maple-dominated forest. Prolific
sprouting ability, light, wind-carried fruits, and the tendency to cast
dense shade has enabled red maple to outcompete white and black oak in
these systems. Without fire as a natural disturbance that prevents
establishment of fire-sensitive species, mesophytic species are free to
invade and recruit into the overstory. Furthermore, due to the naturally
short life span of northern pin oak, red maple is poised to maintain its
dominance once it has established a stable population. Its modifying
effects on understory shade and quick nutrient uptake will exclude the
understory intolerant northern pin oak. Implications to forestry,
wildlife, and pest and disease outbreaks become apparent in the future.

Today, with fragmentation, development, and mesophytic species invasion,
few original dry oak forests remain. However, succession of previous oak
barrens, such as in Allegan County, to closed oak forests has added to
the total area of current dry oak forests.

Issues or Problems

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Though present historically, red maple has been typified as the \"native
invasive\" in oak forests. Its abundance in these systems measured in
both stem density and basal area has grown considerably due to fire
suppression and the marked increase in fire return interval. Abundance
of aspen, sassafras and black cherry can also be attributed to fire
suppression and poor silvicultural practices.

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 2 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem      Upper

  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium          Little bluestem   Upper

  SONU2        Sorghastrum nutans     Indiangrass       Upper
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class A is grassland prairie maintained by frequently recurring fire.
Native Americans used these lands for hunting, and agriculture/native
plant gathering. If fire is absent for a few years, tree seedlings and
sprouts will establish and move the community to the mid-seral, open
stage. Heavy grazing, though unlikely to have large-scale impact, would
have kept certain patches from progressing to a woody shrub vegetation
stage and would have maintained the early-seral stage.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 9 Mid Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                         Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ ------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak          Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak          Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis  Northern pin oak   Mid-Upper

  CAGL8        Carya glabra           Pignut hickory     Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This is an early tree regeneration (root and stump sprouts) phase.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class C 51 Mid Development 2 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                         Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ ------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak          Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak          Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis  Northern pin oak   Upper

  CAGL8        Carya glabra           Pignut hickory     Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class is defined as oak savanna and woodland.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

Class D 34 Late Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                         Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ ------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak          Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak          Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis  Northern pin oak   Upper

  CAGL8        Carya glabra           Pignut hickory     Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class D is defined as an oak forest. Open understories of oak seedlings
exist.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

Class E 4 Late Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific       **Common Name**        **Canopy Position**
               Name**                                    
  ------------ ------------------ ---------------------- -------------------
  ACRU         Acer rubrum        Red maple              Upper

  ACSA3        Acer saccharum     Sugar maple            Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana    American basswood      Upper

  QUAL         Quercus alba       White oak              Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Maple forests develop during the absence of fire. Dense understories of
shade-tolerant species develop. Class E is characterized by closed
canopy forest that can persist in the absence of disturbance. Surface
fires will have little effect.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Braun, E.L., 1950. Deciduous forests of eastern North America. Hafner
Publishing Company, New York, NY.

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A. Corner and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan\'s Native
Landscape as Interpreted from the General Land Office Surveys 1816-1856.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 78 pp.

Corner, and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan's presettlement vegetation, as
interpreted from the General Land Office Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. Digital Map.

Crow, T.R. 1988. Reproductive mode and mechanisms for self-replacement
of northern red oak (Quercus rubra)---A review. Forest Science: 34:
19-40.

Cutter, B.E. and R.P. Guyette, 1994. Fire history of an oak-hickory
ridge top in the Missouri Ozarks. American Midland Naturalist 132:
393-398.

Gleason, H.A. 1913. The relation of forest distribution and prairie
fires in the Middle West. Torreya 13: 173-181.

Greller, A.M. 1988. Deciduous forest. Pages 288-316 in: M.G. Barbour and
W.D. Billings, editors. North American terrestrial vegetation. Cambridge
University Press, New York.

Henderson, N.R. and J.N. Long. 1984. A comparison of stand structure and
fire history in two black oak woodlands in northwestern Indiana.
Botanical Gazette 145: 222-228.

Schuler, T.M. and McClain, W.R. 2003. Fire history of a ridge and valley
oak forest. Newtown Square, PA, USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Forest
Service.

Sutherland, E.K., Hutchinson, T.F. and Yaussy, D.A., 2003. Introduction,
study area description, and experimental design (Chapter 1). Newtown
Square, PA, USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Research Station.
