# 13441 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Boreal Jack Pine-Black Spruce Forest - Pine Barrens {#boreal-jack-pine-black-spruce-forest---pine-barrens .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                          **Reviewers**   
  --------------- --------------------- --------------- -----------------
  Donald Mikel    dmikel@fs.fed.us      Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  Jean Perkins    jeperkins@fs.fed.us   None            None

  None            None                  None            None
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51

Geographic Range

System occurs in northern lower MI, northern WI, northern MN, and
eastern Ontario, north of the climatic tension zone (Curtis 1959) and is
concentrated in the High Plains Subsection in northern lower MI and in
central WI (Vora 1993). Also occurs in several locations in the Upper
Peninsula of MI and is associated with the upper Mississippi and St.
Croix Rivers in MN and WI (Comer 1996).

In MZ51, this type occurs in 212 H, R and S (all subsections contained
within). Within Hiawatha National Forest (Section 212R), pine barrens
are estimated to have covered ca. 17,000 ha (42,000 ac) at the time of
the General Land Office (GLO) Surveys (Comer et al. 1995). The system is
nearly restricted to the Raco Plains and vicinity in north-central
Chippewa County and east of Little Bay de Noc and Whitefish River in
southern Delta County, with small outliers in southern Alger and western
Schoolcraft Counties. Jack pine-red pine forests are estimated to have
covered ca. 17,000 ha (41,000 ac) at the time of the GLO Surveys (Comer
et al. 1995). This system is concentrated in central and western
Chippewa County, especially in the vicinity of the Raco Plains, and
otherwise found mostly in southern Alger, northeastern Delta, and
western Schoolcraft Counties.

Biophysical Site Description

The Boreal Jack Pine-Black Spruce Forest - Pine Barrens system is
endemic to very dry, nutrient-impoverished landscape ecosystems. These
ecosystems occur in landforms deposited by high-energy glacial melt
waters, principally outwash plains and glacial lakebeds, underlain by
well-sorted, coarse-textured sandy soils with low water retaining
capacity. They also occur in bedrock-controlled landforms with shallow
soils of limited moisture storage capacity, and on sand ridges within
peatland complexes (Cohen et al. 2002; Cleland et al. 2004). They are
generally found in cooler climates north of the tension zone. The
topography is flat to gently rolling, typically with long expanses
capable of carrying wildfires with few natural fire breaks. In rolling
topography, pine barrens are found among depressions that collect cold
air, forming frost pockets. The soils of this community are sandy,
acidic, droughty, and relatively infertile (Comer 1996). Where the
system occurs in low-lying areas and low sand ridges in peatland
complexes, the higher water table promotes paludification, which results
in accumulation of an organic horizon above the mineral layers. They
become established in areas with continental climate, in which summers
are typically short and warm to cool, and winters are cold (Pregitzer
and Saunders 1999).

Vegetation Description

In jack pine barrens, *Pinus banksiana* (jack pine) typically dominates
the scattered overstory canopy. Trees can occur as scattered individuals
or in scattered clumps. Several other tree species can be found in this
community. Historically, there was commonly a scattered supercanopy of
*Pinus resinosa* (red pine). Most of these trees were likely removed
during the logging era. *P. resinosa* and *P. strobus* (white pine) were
occasionally common sub-dominants in MI pine barrens, especially in Lake
County. As noted by Epstein et al. (2002), pines may be infrequent or
even absent in some areas of former pine barrens due to historical
logging, altered fire frequencies, and absence of a seed source.
Deciduous trees such as *Quercus ellipsoidalis* (northern pin oak),
*Prunus serotina* (black cherry) and *Populus* spp. (aspens) are capable
of resprouting following fire and are often found as stunted or young
trees, sometimes dominating stands where pines were eliminated by the
aforementioned disturbances. *Quercus macrocarpa* (bur oak) may occur in
Minnesota and Wisconsin. *Vaccinium angustifolium* (low sweet
blueberry), *Comptonia peregrina* (sweet-fern), *Prunus pumila* (sand
cherry), *Salix humilis* (prairie willow), *Amelanchier* spp.
(serviceberries), *Rubus flagellaris* (northern dewberry),
*Arctostaphylos uva-ursi* (bearberry), and *Corylus* spp. (hazelnuts)
make up most of the shrub layer when present (Epstein et al. 2002; Cohen
et al. 2015). *Carex pensylvanica* (Pennsylvania sedge), *Danthonia
spicata* (poverty grass), and *Schizachyrium scoparium* (little
bluestem) are dominant herbaceous species across the range of this
community. Other herbs and forbs vary from one location to another,
depending on local site conditions. Characteristic grasses include
*Andropogon gerardii* (big bluestem), *Avenella flexuosa* (hair grass),
*Bromus kalmii* (prairie brome), *Dichanthelium* spp. (panic grasses),
*Elymus trachycaulus* (slender wheatgrass), *Koeleria macrantha* (June
grass), *Oryzopsis asperifolia* (rough-leaved rice-grass), *Piptatherum
pungens* (rice-grass), and Sorghastrum nutans (Indian grass). Common
forbs include Antennaria howellii (small pussytoes), *Artemisia
campestris* (wormwood), *Campanula rotundifolia* (harebell), *Cirsium
hillii* (Hill's thistle), *Crocanthemum canadense* (common frostweed),
*Fragaria virginiana* (wild strawberry), *Helianthus occidentalis*
(western sunflower), *Hieracium kalmii* (Canada hawkweed), *H. scabrum*
(rough hawkweed), *Houstonia longifolia* (long-leaved bluets), *Liatris
aspera* (rough blazing-star), *L. cylindracea* (cylindrical
blazing-star), *L. scariosa* (northern blazing-star), *Lithospermum
canescens* (hoary puccoon), *L. caroliniense* (hairy puccoon),
*Melampyrum lineare* (cow-wheat), *Packera paupercula* (northern
ragwort), *Solidago hispida* (hairy goldenrod), *S. speciosa* (showy
goldenrod), *Symphyotrichum laeve* (smooth aster), *S. oolentangiense*
(prairie heart-leaved aster), and *Viola pedata* (birdfoot violet;
Epstein et al. 2002; Minnesota Department of Natural Resources 2003;
Reznicek et al. 2011; Cohen et al. 2015). *Pteridium aquilinum* (bracken
fern) is nearly ubiquitous, and *Cladina* spp. (reindeer lichens) are
often prevalent.

As noted by Epstein et al. (2002) for Wisconsin, diversity and
prevalence of prairie species declines from south to north in Michigan.
In Upper Michigan, prairie species are primarily found in Menominee
County, southwest of the Hiawatha National Forest. In the HNF, pine
barrens in the vicinity of Raco lack the "classic" prairie grasses
(little bluestem, big bluestem, and Indian grass), and many
characteristic prairie forbs, such as puccoons and blazing-stars, are
also absent. Instead, these sites support a more simplified ground flora
of generalist graminoids and both shade-tolerant and shade-intolerant
forbs and dwarf shrubs characteristic of dry woodlands and boreal
forests, including such species as *Cypripedium acaule* (pink
lady-slipper), *Epigaea repens* (trailing-arbutus), *Gaultheria
procumbens* (wintergreen), *Maianthemum canadense* (Canada mayflower),
and *Trientalis borealis* (starflower) (MNFI 2016). The pine barrens of
southern Delta County appear to be similarly impoverished in prairie
taxa, although rough blazing-star has been documented from that area
(Reznicek et al. 2011).

In dry pine forests, *Pinus banksiana* (jack pine) typically dominates
the overstory canopy. *Pinus resinosa* (red pine) dominates some stands
and may form a scattered super-canopy in stands otherwise dominated by
jack pine. Most of these trees were likely removed during the logging
era. *Quercus ellipsoidalis* (northern pin oak) is also locally
important. Canopy associates include *Acer rubrum* (red maple), *Betula
papyrifera* (paper or white birch), *Pinus strobus* (white pine, which
occasionally occurs in the super-canopy), *Populus grandidentata*
(bigtooth aspen), *Populus tremuloides* (trembling aspen), *Prunus
serotina* (black cherry), and *Quercus rubra* (red oak; Cohen 2002).
*Picea mariana* (black spruce) may also occur, particularly where the
system occurs on dune ridges within peatlands. Many former areas of jack
pine and red pine forests succeeded to open "stump prairies" or scrubby
forests of *Populus grandidentata* (bigtooth aspen), *P. tremuloides*
(quaking aspen), *Betula papyrifera* (paper birch), and *Prunus
serotina* (black cherry) following widespread logging and slash fires in
the mid-1800s to early 1900s (Cohen 2002; Epstein et al. 2002).
*Vaccinium angustifolium* (low sweet blueberry), *V. myrtilloides*
(Canada blueberry), and *Gaylussacia baccata* (huckleberry) are common
low shrubs; characteristic dwarf shrubs include *Arctostaphylos
uva-ursi* (bearberry), *Chimaphila umbellata* (pipsissewa), *Cornus
canadensis* (bunchberry), *Epigaea repens* (trailing-arbutus), and
*Gaultheria procumbens* (wintergreen; Epstein et al. 2002; MNDNR 2003;
Cohen et al. 2015). In openings, *Comptonia peregrina* (sweet-fern),
*Prunus pumila* (sand cherry), *Salix humilis* (prairie willow), and
*Corylus* spp. (hazelnuts) may be present. On paludified sand ridges,
species typical of peatlands, such as *Chamaedaphne calyculata*
(leatherleaf) and *Rhododendron groenlandicum* (Labrador-tea) may
proliferate. Characteristic herbaceous species include *Pteridium
aquilinum* (bracken fern), *Avenella flexuosa* (wiry hair grass),
*Danthonia spicata* (poverty grass), *Carex pensylvanica* (Pennsylvania
sedge), *Aralia nudicaulis* (sarsaparilla), *Maianthemum canadense*
(Canada mayflower), *Trientalis borealis* (starflower), *Mitchella
repens* (partridge-berry), *Apocynum androsaemifolium* (spreading
dogbane), *Eurybia macrophylla* (large-leaved aster), *Melampyrum
lineare* (cow-wheat), *Linnaea borealis* (twinflower), *Oryzopsis
asperifolia* (rough-leaved rice-grass), and *Piptatheropsis pungens*
(rice-grass; Cohen 2002; Epstein et al. 2002; MNDNR 2003; Cohen et al.
2015). Mosses (e.g., *Dicranum* spp. and *Pleurozium schreberi*) and
lichens (e.g., *Cladina* and *Cladonia* spp.) often form a mat on the
soil (Cohen 2002).

At Crex Meadows in western WI, Vogl (1970) studied pine barrens as
described by original land survey records. He estimated that there were
20 trees greater than 15cm (6in) in diameter per hectare. This
translates to an average distance between trees of 24m (65ft). The trees
in this community had typical open-grown shapes. They had branches most
of the way down their trunks with many needles. Many burned jack pine
snags were encountered by land surveyors in MI. Zimmerman (1956)
reported that the tallest tree in his 50 study sites was 16m (52ft). The
average tree height was only eight meters (26ft). This may be misleading
because past logging may have eliminated the largest trees and there has
not been enough time to regenerate the tallest pines. Vogl (1970), in
his analysis of General Land Office surveys conducted in western
Wisconsin, found that the average diameter of Pinus banksiana was 25 cm
(10 in) and of P. resinosa was 50 cm (20 in). This indicates that taller
trees may have existed before logging and the subsequent slash-fires
that swept through most barrens. In northern Lower Michigan, jack pines
in the 5 -- 30 cm diameter size classes are characteristic of pine
barrens at the present time, with trees in the middle of that range aged
between 20 and 45 years (MNFI 2016). Jack pine and jack pine-red pine
forests are characterized by a more closed, but still interrupted
canopy, often from 50-75% (MNDNR 2003; MNFI 2016). Jack pines are
typically in the 20 -- 40 cm diameter size class; red pines in the 40 --
75 cm class; and white pines often in the 60 -- 80 cm size class, with
some trees exceeding 100 cm (MNFI 2016). Canopy height can approach 30 m
(100 ft) (MNFI 2016).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  PIBA2        *Pinus banksiana*                Jack pine

  CAPE6        *Carex pensylvanica*             Pennsylvania sedge

  QUEL         *Quercus ellipsoidalis*          Northern pin oak

  SCSC         *Schizachyrium scoparium*        Little bluestem

  VAAN         *Vaccinium angustifolium*        Lowbush blueberry

  ANGE         *Andropogon gerardii*            Big bluestem

  PIRE         *Pinus resinosa*                 Red pine
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Frequent fire and, in some places, frost and drought conditions,
maintain open canopy conditions by limiting the development of woody
vegetation and thereby allowing the maintenance of a mixture of grasses
and sedges. Pine barrens were found in the most fire-prone and driest
areas of the landscape, often west of fire breaks. Barrens typically
occur within long expanses capable of carrying wildfires with few
natural fire breaks. In rolling topography, pine barrens are found in
depressions that collect cold air, forming frost pockets (Comer 1996).
There are numerous estimates of fire return interval for upland jack
pine systems depending on scale, geographic location of study, and
habitat characteristics (e.g., tree density). Whitney (1986) estimated
average return time for canopy replacement fire in jack pine forests of
northern lower MI to be about 80 yrs. Similar return times (50-100 yrs)
have been estimated by Heinselman (1981) in MN. Whitney (1986) also
estimated that surface fires occurred every 25 yrs, while Heinselman
(1981) suggested that on drier sites light to moderate surface fires may
have occurred every 20-40 yrs. Simard & Blank (1982) calculated
presettlement fire frequency in the Mack Lake area of Oscoda County,
Michigan to have averaged in the range of 13-41yrs. GLO data indicate
that fire and windthrow were important in some barrens landscapes (Comer
et al. 1995, Corner and Albert 1999). Historical reports document
near-annual fires in barrens (Curtis 1959). Radeloff et al. (2004)
concluded that three distinct fire regimes characterized jack pine
barrens/forest in northwestern Wisconsin, ranging from frequent,
non-lethal surface fires on low-relief landscapes characterized by
relatively productive soils, prairie grasses, and relatively dry
climate, to medium frequency, lethal crown fires on less productive
soils with greater topographic relief occurring in a relatively moist
climate near Lake Superior. Large, stand-replacing fires, especially
those consuming \>1,000 ha, produce narrow, remnant strips of unburned
trees (stringers) that contribute to structural heterogeneity and
persistence of late-successional species (Kashian et al. 2012).
Stand-replacing fires also create numerous snags (Corace et al. 2010).
Insect infestations in jack pine are also an important disturbance
factor, often followed by canopy fire. This system falls within Fire
Regimes I and II.

Pine barrens in the HNF occur on low-relief proglacial outwash on poor
soils with little to no prairie grass component, and occur in both
relatively moist (i.e., Raco Plains) and relatively dry (i.e., Rapid
River) climates. Loope and Anderton (1998) report a fire return interval
of approximately 17 years for the Raco Plains, less frequent than that
reported for barrens supporting prairie grasses in drier climates, but
more frequent than that reported for more heavily forested landscapes
(Radeloff et al. 2004). No fire data specific to the area of pine
barrens in Delta County are available, but fire frequency and severity
there was likely affected by the drier climate, narrower configuration
of the barrens just east of major fire breaks (Little Bay de Noc and
Whitefish River), and presence of Native American villages near what is
today Rapid River.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

There is considerable variation in the size of burned areas. In northern
lower MI, GLO surveyors frequently reported the occurrence of large
wildfires. These fires were among the largest in the state, covering
several square miles (Corner and Albert 1999). Mean patch size of fire
in xeric areas dominated by jack pine in the eastern Upper Peninsula of
MI varied widely (34-3436ha) (Comer et al. 1995).

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

This system was mapped separately from 5114072 (Laurentian-Acadian Jack
Pine Barrens and Forest), but there are significant similarities between
the two, especially with the textual descriptions. Jack pine barrens
often occurred on extensive areas of outwash plain intermixed with dry
sand prairie and closed-canopy jack pine systems. Other classifications:
Michigan Natural Features Inventory (MNFI) natural community
classification: pine barrens. The Nature Conservancy National
Classification: CODE: (III.A.4a.SW20.00). IVC Alliance: Pinus
banksiana - Pinus spp. - Quercus spp. Wooded Herbaceous Alliance (Great
Lakes Pine - Oak Barrens). Associations: Pinus banksiana - Pinus
resinosa - (Quercus ellipsoidalis) / Carex pensylvanica Wooded
Herbaceous Vegetation; Pinus banksiana - (Quercus ellipsoidalis) /
Schizachyrium scoparium - Prairie Forbs Barrens Woodland.

Issues or Problems

Need more research on frequency of historical surface fire. What
constitutes pine barrens versus jack pine forest or dry sand prairie
depends on temporal and spatial scales.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

Prior to the LANDFIRE Remap this BpS was named Great Lakes Pine Barrens.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 35 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                             Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- ------------------- -----------------
  CAPE6        Carex pensylvanica        Pennsylvania sedge  Lower

  SCSC         Schizachyrium scoparium   Little bluestem     Lower

  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana           Jack pine           Upper

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii       Big bluestem        Lower
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Sedges and grasses and/or low shrubs are dominant, with scattered jack
pine regeneration and hardwood resprouts (e.g., *Prunus serotina*,
*Quercus ellipsoidalis*).

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. Grasses and sedges
and/or low shrubs \<0.5 m are dominant lifeforms, at least in the first
few years of this class. Typically, herbaceous species are less than a
meter in height; shrubs may exceed 1 m but dominant shrubs (typically
low sweet blueberry) are typically \<0.5 m. Minimum cover for herbaceous
species is approximately 40% while maximum coverage is 90%. Shrub cover
varies from \<1% (atypical) to 90%, likely averaging between 10-50%
depending on site conditions and land use history. Tree cover starts out
very low as jack pine germination may lag stand replacement fire by up
to two months and increases throughout the successional stage as trees
increase in size.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\"DBH

Class B 15 Mid Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**     **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- ------------------- --------------------
  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana     Jack pine           Upper

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Upper layer characterized by jack pine regeneration (seedlings or
saplings), with sedges, grasses, and/or low shrubs codominant, although
these may remain dominant in this class in sparsely treed barrens.

Would have similar ground cover as class A.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<10\"DBH

Class C 31 Mid Development 2 - Open

Indicator Species

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                             Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- ------------------- -----------------
  CAPE6        Carex pensylvanica        Pennsylvania sedge  Lower

  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana           Jack pine           Upper

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii       Big bluestem        Lower

  SCSC         Schizachyrium scoparium   Little bluestem     Lower
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Sedges and grasses are frequent, with scattered jack pine trees and low
shrubs.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. Upper layer
characterized by jack pine. Grasses and sedges are codominant lifeform.
Typically, herbaceous species are less than a meter in height. Minimum
cover for herbaceous species is approximately 40%, while maximum
coverage is 90%. Shrub cover varies from \<1% (atypical) to 90%, likely
averaging between 10-50% depending on site conditions and land use
history.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<10\"DBH

Class D 19 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**     **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ----------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana         Jack pine           Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis   Northern pin oak    Upper

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii     Big bluestem        Lower

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa          Red pine            Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Closed-canopy jack pine forest that results after prolonged periods of
fire suppression or microtopography that protects forest from fires
(approximately 25yrs). Red pines and oaks come in after a period of no
fire.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Cleland, D., B. Patterson, G. Nowacki, A. Koonce and J. Merzenich. 2004.
Fire Regime Condition Class Model for Jack Pine/Open Lands with frequent
(high) fire interval (R6JAPI).

Cohen, J.G., M.A. Kost, B.S. Slaughter, and D.A. Albert. 2015. A field
guide to the natural communities of Michigan. Michigan State University
Press, East Lansing, MI. 362 pp.

Comer P.J. 1996. Natural community abstract for pine barrens. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 3 pp.

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A. Corner and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan\'s
Presettlement Vegetation, as Interpreted from the General Land Office
Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI.
Digital map.

Corace, R.G. III, N.E. Seefelt, P.C. Goebel, and H.L. Shaw. 2010. Snag
longevity and decay class development in a recent jack pine clearcut in
Michigan. Northern Journal of Applied Forestry 27: 125-131.

Corner, R.A. and D.A. Albert. 1999. Landtype Associations of The High
Plains: Subsection VII.2. Prepared for the Northern Lower Michigan
Ecosystem Management Project. Michigan Natural Features Inventory report
number 1999-03. 177 pp. + maps.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. U. of Wis. Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Epstein, E.J., E.J. Judziewicz, and E.A. Spencer. 2002. Wisconsin
natural community abstracts. Department of Natural Resources, Bureau of
Natural Resources, Madison, WI.

Heinselman, M.L. 1981. Fire intensity and frequency as factors in the
distribution and structure of northern ecosystems. Pp. 7-57 in H.
Mooney, J.M. Bonnicksen, N.L. Christensen, J.E. Lotan and W.A. Reiners,
eds., Fire regimes and ecosystem properties. General Technical Report
WO-26, USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C.

Kashian, D.M., R.G. Corace III, L.M. Shartell, D.M. Donner, and P.W.
Huber. 2012. Variability and persistence of post-fire biological
legacies in jack pine-dominated ecosystems of northern Lower Michigan.
Forest Ecology and Management 263: 148-158.

Loope, W.L., and J.B. Anderton. 1998. Human vs. lightning ignition of
presettlement surface fires in coastal pine forests of the Upper Great
Lakes. American Midland Naturalist 140: 206-218.

Menard, S., and D. Faber-Langendoen. 2013. Jack Pine - Northern Pin Oak
Barrens Group \[Version Date 04Oct2013\]. United States National
Vegetation Classification. Federal Geographic Data Committee,
Washington, D.C.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory (MNFI). 2016. Natural heritage
database. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI.

Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 2003. Field guide to the
native plant communities of Minnesota: The Laurentian Mixed Forest
Province. Ecological Land Classification Program, Minnesota County
Biological Survey, and Natural Heritage and Nongame Research Program,
MNDNR St. Paul, MN.

Pregitzer, K.S. and S.C. Saunders. 1999. Jack pine barrens of the
northern Great Lakes region. Pp. 343-361 in R.C. Anderson, J.S. Fralish,
and J.M. Baskin (eds.) Savannas, Barrens, and Rock Outcrop Plant
Communities of North America. Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Radeloff, V.C., D.J. Mladenoff, R.P. Guries, and M.S. Boyce. 2004.
Spatial patterns in cone serotiny in Pinus banksiana in relation to fire
disturbance. Forest Ecology and Management 189: 133-141.

Simard, A.J. and R.W. Blank. 1982. Fire history of a Michigan jack pine
forest. Mich. Acad. 15: 59-71.

Vogl, R.J. 1970. Fire and the northern Wisconsin pine barrens.
Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference 10: 175-209.

Vora, R.S. 1993. Moquah barrens: Pine barrens restoration experiment
initiated in Chequamegon National Forest. Restor. And Mgmt. Notes 11(1):
39-44.

Whitney, G.G. 1986. Relation of Michigan\'s presettlement pine forests
to substrate and disturbance history. Ecology 67(6): 1548-1559.

Zimmerman, D.A. 1956. The jack pine association in the Lower Peninsula
of Michigan: Its structure and composition. PhD. Thesis. U. of Mich.,
Ann Arbor, MI.
