# 13620 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Laurentian-Acadian Northern Pine(-Oak) Forest {#laurentian-acadian-northern-pine-oak-forest .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                                 **Reviewers**   
  --------------- ---------------------------- --------------- ----------------
  Becky Schillo   schillor@michigan.gov        Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  Brad Slaughter  slaughterb@michigan.gov      None            None

  Doug Cox        mteecology@frontiernet.net   None            None
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51, 63, 64, 65, 66

Geographic Range

Laurentian-Acadian Northern Pine Oak Forest is a wide-ranging system
occurring in Canada from Quebec west to Ontario and south in the United
States in the northern Great Lakes states (Minnesota, Wisconsin,
Michigan), New York, and New England (Menard and Gawler 2010).

Northern pine-oak forests occur principally on sandy glacial outwash,
sandy glacial lake plains, and less often on thin glacial drift over
bedrock, inland dune ridges, and coarse-textured end moraines and
ice-contact ridges. Soils are typically coarse- to medium- textured sand
or loamy sand and are moderately to extremely acidic with a surface
layer of mor humus from accumulated pine needles (Cohen 2002). The
system occurred in proximity to other pyrogenic systems such as red pine
\-- jack pine forest and jack pine barrens \-- but had a greater
tendency to occur in areas with greater topographic relief and presence
of wetlands and lakes that likely combined to reduce fire severity
(Albert and Comer 2008).

Vegetation Description

Typically *Pinus strobus* (white pine) and/or *P. resinosa* (red pine)
form a supercanopy over a canopy of co-dominant or subcanopy trees such
as *Acer rubrum* (red maple), *Betula papyrifera* (paper birch),
*Populus grandidentata* (bigtooth aspen), *P. tremuloides* (trembling
aspen), *Quercus alba* (white oak), *Q. rubra* (red oak), *Q. velutina*
(black oak), *Q. ellipsoidalis* (northern pin oak), *Q. macrocarpa* (bur
oak), *Pinus banksiana* (jack pine), *Tsuga canadensis* (eastern
hemlock), *Abies balsamea* (balsam fir), *Picea glauca* (white spruce),
and *P. rubens* (red spruce) (Epstein et al. 2002; MNDNR 2003; Cohen et
al. 2015; NatureServe 2016). Where the system occurs adjacent to or
within large peatland complexes, additional canopy species may include
*Picea mariana* (black spruce) and *Thuja occidentalis* (northern white
cedar) (MNFI 2016). Portions of this type that occur on more mesic
portions of the landscape may include *Acer saccharum* (sugar maple),
*Betula alleghaniensis* (yellow birch), and *Fagus grandifolia*
(American beech), although systems where these species are prevalent
should be referred to Biophysical Setting (BpS) 5113022
(Laurentian-Acadian Northern Hardwoods Forest \-- Hemlock).

Small trees and shrubs are patchy to occasionally continuous. Prevalent
species include balsam fir, *Prunus virginiana* (choke cherry),
*Hamamelis virginiana* (witch-hazel), *Corylus cornuta* (beaked
hazelnut), *Amelanchier* spp. (serviceberries), *Gaylussacia baccata*
(huckleberry), *Vaccinium angustifolium* (low sweet blueberry), *V.
myrtilloides* (Canada blueberry), and *Lonicera canadensis* (Canadian
fly honeysuckle). On sand ridges within peatlands, species such as *Ilex
mucronata* (mountain holly) and *Viburnum cassinoides* (wild raisin) may
be present (MNFI 2016). Common dwarf shrubs include *Epigaea repens*
(trailing arbutus), *Gaultheria procumbens* (wintergreen), *Cornus
canadensis* (bunchberry), and *Chimaphila umbellata* (pipsissewa) (MNDNR
2003; Cohen et al. 2015).

The herbaceous layer in northern pine-oak forests is also patchy to
continuous. Characteristic species include *Eurybia macrophylla*
(large-leaved aster), *Maianthemum canadense* (Canada mayflower),
*Aralia nudicaulis* (sarsaparilla), *Mitchella repens*
(partridge-berry), *Pyrola elliptica* (large-leaved shinleaf),
*Trientalis borealis* (starflower), *Melampyrum lineare* (cow-wheat),
*Pteridium aquilinum* (bracken fern), *Dendrolycopodium obscurum*
(ground-pine), *Avenella flexuosa* (wiry hair-grass), *Oryzopsis
asperifolia* (rough-leaved rice-grass), *Danthonia spicata* (poverty
grass), *Brachyelytrum aristosum* (long-awned wood grass), and *Carex
pensylvanica* (Pennsylvania sedge) (Epstein et al. 2002; MNDNR 2003;
Cohen et al. 2015). Lichens and mosses may also be prevalent in the
ground layer (Menard and Gawler 2010).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  PIRE         *Pinus resinosa*                 Red pine

  PIST         *Pinus strobus*                  Eastern white pine

  QURU         *Quercus rubra*                  Northern red oak
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

The natural disturbance regime in northern pine-oak forests is
characterized by both infrequent catastrophic fire and frequent
stand-perpetuating surface fires. This system fits into Fire Regime
Group I, with fires occurring every 10-30yrs and low- to
moderate-intensity (surface) fires most common. Severe wind events
affect mature stands as infrequently as \>1000yrs (MNDNR 2003).
Replacement fires occurred more frequently in barrens, young stands of
mixed conifers, and mature closed conifers, whereas stands of mature,
open conifers were primarily affected by surface fires.

Young white and red pines are killed by surface fires, becoming more
resistant to fire disturbance when mature (age 50-100yrs). Once mature
(\~50yrs), both red pine and white pine are fire-adapted species and can
withstand surface fire quite well. Mature stands are less susceptible to
stand-replacing fires, due to tall crowns and the wide spacing of
dominant trees, which is maintained by surface fires. However, when
catastrophic crown fires do occur, mortality is high in all structural
layers, and survivorship depends on random variations in fire patterns
resulting in unburned areas.

Fifty to 100yrs is required for red and white pine to produce adequate
amounts of viable seed for self-replacement; thus crown-fire rotations
of \<50-100yrs favor early successional species capable of sprouting or
invasion (e.g., aspen and birch), as well as species capable of
producing seed in short periods (e.g., jack pine and black spruce).
White pine is a mid-tolerant species capable of regenerating under full
light to shaded conditions. Red pine is less tolerant than white pine,
and seedlings can only survive in \~35% or more full sunlight. This red
pine-white pine community was predominantly even-aged due to frequent
stand-replacing fires, with a relatively uniform structure in terms of
tree height and diameter. During fire-free periods or periods with long
surface fire rotation, mid-tolerant white pine gained dominance through
gap-phase regeneration. During periods of repeated surface fires, red
pine was favored over white pine.

Successional dynamics within this community were driven by interactions
of disturbance regimes and neighborhood effects of nearby seed sources.
Areas burning twice within short periods became temporary open lands and
barrens or early-successional aspen-birch.

Heinselman (1981) suggested there are two types of red-white pine
systems \-- those maintained by frequent surface fires and a crown-fire
rotation \<150yrs and those maintained by infrequent surface fires and
crown-fire rotations between 150-300yrs. In the former, even-aged stands
dominated, whereas in the latter systems, multi-aged white pine systems
eventually developed. This description applies to red-white pine that
occurred within landscape ecosystems where stand-replacing fires burned
with 150yr rotations. Surface and crown fire regimes interacted to
regulate age, landscape, within-stand structure, and succession within
this community. Fire probability often increased with stand age due to
the general increase in fuel (Clark 1990; Heinselman 1973), but
individual tree susceptibility to damage or mortality from fire often
declined with tree size due to increasing bark thickness and a
separation of foliage from the ground, which reduces crown-fire
occurrence. Red-white pine forests were disturbed by large-scale,
stand-replacing, crown fires in northern Lower Michigan within rotations
of 130-260yrs (Whitney 1986) and relatively frequent surface fires. In
Michigan's Upper Peninsula, Zhang et al. (1999) estimated that mixed
red-jack-white pine communities burned on 160yr rotations and that
red-white pine communities burned on 320yr rotations. Clark (1990),
Heinselman (1981), and Frissel (1973) reported rotations of 135, 180,
and 150yrs, respectively, for red-white pine communities in Minnesota.
Cleland et al. (2004a) estimated crown-fire rotations for the red-white
pine community to be 164, 174, and 207yrs in northern Lower Michigan,
Michigan's Upper Peninsula, and northern Wisconsin, respectively. Longer
rotations in Wisconsin are believed to be due to a higher density of
lakes and wetlands, resulting in a smaller surface area of upland
landforms.

This community may have promoted surface fires by forming a deep,
well-aerated litter layer of pine needles (McCune 1988). Relatively
frequent surface fires (10-30yr cycles) reduced fuel loadings,
eliminated living fuel ladders, and promoted widely spaced trees that
became increasingly resistant to crown fires over time (Frissell 1973).
Surface fire regimes favored species with survival adaptations including
thick bark and tall crowns and maintained a landscape with a large
proportion composed of widely spaced, large pine. Surface fires also
reduced competition and limited succession of more shade-tolerant
species. Area maintained by surface fire was likely inversely related to
area burned by crown fire, due to reduced fuel loadings and removal of
shade-tolerant, coniferous fuel ladders. Fires burning in closed forests
could be quite variable in intensity \-- from light surface fires to
intense crown fires. Thus, each fire event represented a complex of fire
types, with forest maintenance surface fires and forest-replacement
crown fires interacting to form a single overall regime. Increased
frequency of maintenance fires lengthened crown-fire rotations by
reducing fuel loadings and eliminating the fuel ladders that promote
crown fires.

Notes from 2017 BpS review:

-   Drobyshev et al. (2009) reported wide variation in fire rotation
    intervals for Seney National Wildlife Refuge, 30-144yrs
    historically, with most fires being non-replacement. Some areas had
    fire much more frequently. Fire frequency related to landform (also
    see White and Host 2008, report landform-fire relationship in
    Minnesota).

-   Seedling establishment of red and white pines positively correlated
    with number of fires. See Nyamai et al. (2014) for more information.

-   Magruder et al. (2013) report that thinning increases climatic
    resilience of red pine.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Landscape must be adequate in size to contain natural variation in
vegetation and disturbance regime. Though the virgin stands of red and
white pine are greatly reduced from pre-settlement conditions, scattered
stands and ecosystems still exist to represent this type. The Boundary
Waters Canoe Area Wilderness (BWCAW) is an example, along with the
national forests in Minnesota (Chippewa, Superior), Michigan (Ottawa,
Hiawatha), and Wisconsin (Chequamegon, Nicolet) and the Menominee
Reservation in Wisconsin.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

The natural range of red pine and white pine largely coincides with the
extent of the Canadian shield. These pine forests were widespread in the
past and included a diverse mixture of hardwood and conifer species
including trembling aspen, bigtooth aspen, paper birch, white spruce,
black spruce, balsam fir, red maple, sugar maple, and northern red oak.
BpS 1301 \-- Boreal Aspen Birch Forest has been eliminated and lumped
into several other BpSs in the Great Lakes. Trembling aspen-paper birch
may have been a significant component of the early successional stages
of this and other BpSs.

Sites supporting dominance of *Tsuga canadensis* (\>25%), with varying
mixtures of *Pinus strobus*, *Thuja occidentalis*, and other northern
hardwood species, such as *Betula alleghaniensis*, *Acer saccharum*,
*Fagus grandifolia*, and *Quercus rubra*, and the absence of any of the
Appalachian species, including *Aesculus flava*, *Betula lenta*,
*Liriodendron tulipifera*, and *Quercus prinus*. *Picea glauca*, *Picea
rubens*, and *Abies balsamea* \<25%, are placed in Eastern Hemlock \--
Eastern White Pine \-- Yellow Birch Forest Group (Gawler and
Faber-Langendoen 2015). Hemlock and white pine can be co-dominant at the
margins of dune ridges that are otherwise characterized by more xeric
red pine-white pine communities in Upper Michigan.

Historically, this system was one of the most economically important
species group in the lake states region. Extensive logging and
subsequent slash fires that occurred throughout the Great Lakes in the
mid- to late 1800s reduced the extent of this system.

Other classifications (as of 2008): Michigan Natural Features Inventory:
Dry-mesic Northern Forest. Minnesota: Central Dry Pine Woodland; Central
Dry Oak-Aspen (Pine) Woodland; Central Dry-mesic Pine-Hardwood Forest
(MNDNR 2003). Wisconsin: Northern Dry-mesic Forest (Epstein et al.
2002). National Vegetation Classification (NVC): Laurentian-Acadian Pine
\-- Oak Forest and Woodland Group; Associations CEGL002443 *Pinus
resinosa* \-- *Pinus strobus*/*Corylus cornuta*/*Vaccinium
angustifolium* Forest; CEGL002445 *Pinus strobus*/*Acer spicatum* \--
*Corylus cornuta* Forest; CEGL002480 *Pinus strobus* \-- (*Pinus
resinosa*) \-- *Quercus* *rubra* Forest; CEGL005399 *Pinus resinosa* \--
*Pinus strobus* \-- (*Quercus rubra*)/*Corylus cornuta* Forest;
CEGL006253 *Pinus strobus* \-- *Pinus resinosa*/*Cornus canadensis*
Forest; CEGL006506 *Quercus rubra* \-- *Acer rubrum* \-- *Betula* spp.
\-- *Pinus strobus Ruderal* Forest.

Issues or Problems

At the suggestion of the Rapid Assessment model (R6RPWff): The VDDT
model was modified to increase the probability of wind storm events.
Frelich has documented wind disturbance of catastrophic proportions as
occurring on a 1,000-2,000yr interval. Granted that this may possibly be
the landscape-level mean, wind events are far more prevalent and occur
randomly and with widespread regularity throughout the range of the red
and white pine cover type. Thus, using local data, the wind event
probability was increased to occur on an \~250yr average.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

Laurentian-Acadian Pine \-- Oak Forest and Woodland Group per NVC
(Menard and Gawler 2010; = Eastern White Pine \-- Jack Pine \-- Northern
Red Oak Forest and Woodland Group). Described and modeled here is the
Eastern White Pine \-- Red Pine \-- Northern Red Oak Forest and Woodland
Alliance. The other Alliance under this Group is *Pinus banksiana* \--
*Pinus resinosa* \-- *Quercus ellipsoidalis* Forest and Woodland
Alliance, which is described and modeled in the Great Lakes Pine Barrens
BpS; 13620 may instead be the appropriate place for these jack pine
forests.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 13 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**       **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- --------------------- -------------------
  PIRE         Pinus resinosa      Red pine              Upper

  PIST         Pinus strobus       Eastern white pine    Upper

  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana     Jack pine             Low-Mid

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides Quaking aspen         Mid-Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera   Paper birch           Mid-Upper

  POGR4        Populus             Bigtooth aspen        Mid-Upper
               grandidentata                             
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class is typified by barrens and open lands dominated by shrubs,
sweet fern, bracken fern, blueberry, sedges, grasses, and other
herbaceous plants. This stage represents 0-30yrs in time. At the start
of this class, trees comprise \<10% canopy cover, including those that
survived a catastrophic fire event. After 5-10yrs, pine and oak
seedlings and saplings will establish. If a replacement fire occurs in
Early1:All, this stage will consist of scrubby oak grubs and young jack
pines.

Upper-layer lifeform is not the dominant lifeform: dominant lifeform
consists of low shrubs, ferns, and herbaceous species, although any
existing scattered trees would be the upper-level lifeform.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class B 13 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  PIRE         Pinus resinosa         Red pine           Upper

  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana        Jack pine          Upper

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Mid-Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Mid-Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class is comprised of mixed red pine-jack pine-oak stands with a
bigtooth and trembling aspen-birch component that has established
following a major disturbance event. This stage could establish in the
absence of a nearby pine and oak seed source. This stage may include a
significant component of aspens and paper birch with young pines and
oaks in the understory of these pioneer species. After 30-50yrs, pine
and hardwoods may begin to compete with pioneer aspens and birch and
obtain canopy dominance. By 75-100yrs, aspens and birch will begin to
senesce and pine and oak species will reach canopy dominance.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\" DBH

Class C 48 Mid Development 2 - Open

Upper Layer Lifeform: Tree

Upper Layer Canopy Cover: 0 - 40%

Upper Layer Canopy Height: Tree 5.1m - Tree 25m

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**       **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- --------------------- -------------------
  PIRE         Pinus resinosa      Red pine              Upper

  PIST         Pinus strobus       Eastern white pine    Upper

  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana     Jack pine             Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class is a mid-seral stage comprised of young red pine-white pine
stands 30-150yrs old. Jack pine could be a significant component of this
mid-seral stages, especially following replacement or frequent fire
events. This stage would occur on drier, more barren sites where aspen
and birch are not a major component or where seed-producing pines seeded
in after a fire event. Also, these drier sites would be more fire-prone,
and therefore frequent surface fires would help maintain the open
conditions of this class.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\" DBH

Class D 26 Late Development 1 - Closed

Upper Layer Lifeform: Tree

Upper Layer Canopy Cover: 51 - 90%

Upper Layer Canopy Height: Tree 25.1m - Tree 50m

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                            Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- --------------------- -----------------
  PIRE         Pinus resinosa         Red pine              Upper

  PIST         Pinus strobus          Eastern white pine    Upper

               Vaccinium spp.                               Lower

  COCO6        Corylus cornuta        Beaked hazelnut       
               Marshall                                     
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class D is comprised of mature red pine-white pine stands (\>151yrs).
There may be a subcanopy of hardwood species such as oaks and red maple.
There may also be a low to mid-shrub layer of shrubs such as witch hazel
and maple-leaved viburnum. Ground-layer species may include wintergreen
and wild sarsaparilla.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\" DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Albert, D.A., and P.J. Comer. 2008. Atlas of early Michigan's forests,
grasslands, and wetlands: An interpretation of the 1816 -- 1856 General
Land Office Surveys. Michigan State University Press, East Lansing, MI.
107 pp.

Bergeron, Y. 1991. The influence of island and mainland lakeshore
landscapes on boreal forest fire regimes. Ecology 72:1980--1992.

Bergeron, Y. and J. Brisson. 1990. Fire regime in red pine stands at the
northern limit of the species range. Ecology 17:1352-1364.

Braun, E.L. 1950. Deciduous Forests of Eastern North America. Blackburn
Press. Caldwell, NJ. 596 pp.

Clark, James S. 1990. Fire and climate change during the last 750 years
in northwestern Minnesota. Ecological Monographs 60(2):135-159.

Cleland, D.T., S.C. Saunders, T.R. Crow, D.I. Dickmann, A.L. Maclean,
J.K. Jordan, R.L. Watson and A.M. Sloan. 2004. Characterizing historical
and modern fire regimes in the Lake States: A landscape ecosystem
approach. Landscape Ecology 19:311-325. 2004.

Cleland, D.T., S.C. Saunders, K.M. Brosofske, A.L. Maclean, J.K. Jordan,
R.L. Watson, A.M. Sloan, T.M. Scupien, T.R. Crow and D.I. Dickmann.
2003. Ongoing project to determine historical and modern wind and fire
regimes, fire risk and historical landscape and community composition
and structure in the Lake States and R-9 National Forests.

Cohen, J. G. 2002. Natural Community abstract for dry-mesic northern
forest. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 12 pp.

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A. Cornerand D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan\'s
Presettlement Vegetation, as Interpreted from the General Land Office
Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI.
Digital map.

Dansereau, P.R.and Bergeron, Y. 1993. Fire history in the southern
boreal forest of

northwestern Quebec. Can. J. For. Research 23:25-32.

Drobyshev, I., Goebel, P.C., Hix, D.M., Corace, R.G. and Semko-Duncan,
M.E., 2008. Pre-and post-European settlement fire history of red pine
dominated forest ecosystems of Seney National Wildlife Refuge, Upper
Michigan. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 38(9), pp.2497-2514.

Frissell, S.S. Jr. 1973. The importance of fire as a natural ecological
factor in Itasca State Park, Minnesota. Quat. Research 3:397-407.

Gawler, S.C., and D. Faber-Langendoen, mod. J. Drake. 2015. Tsuga
canadensis - Pinus strobus - Betula alleghaniensis Forest Group. United
States National Vegetation Classification. Federal Geographic Data
Committee, Washington, D.C.

Heinselman, M.L. 1981. Fire and succession in the conifer forests of
North America. In forest succession: concepts and applications. West,
D.C, H.H. Shugart and D.B. Botkin, eds. Springer-Verlag, New York.
374-406.

Heinselman, M.L. 1978. Fire Intensity and Frequency as Factors In The
Distribution and Structure of Northern Ecosystems. USDA, GTO, WO-26.

Heinselman, M.L. 1973. Fire in the virgin forests of the Boundary Waters
Canoe Area, Minnesota. University of Michigannnesota. Quat. Research
3:329-382.

Holla, Teresa A. and Peggy I. Knowles. 1988. Age structure analysis of a
virgin white pine, Pinus strobus, population. Canadian Field-Naturalist
102(2):221-226.

Magruder, M., Chhin, S., Palik, B. and Bradford, J.B., 2013. Thinning
increases climatic resilience of red pine. Canadian journal of forest
research, 43(9), pp.878-889.

McCune, Bruce. 1988. Ecological diversity in North American pines. Amer.
J. Boany. 75(3):353-368.

Menard, S., and S. Gawler. 2010. Laurentian-Acadian Pine - Oak Forest &
Woodland \[Version Date: 22Jan2010\]. United States National Vegetation
Classification. Federal Geographic Data Committee, Washington, D.C.

Motzkin, G., P. Wilson, D.R. Foster and A. Allen. 1999. Vegetation
patterns in heterogeneous landscapes: the importance of history and
environment. Journal of Vegetation Science.

NatureServe. 2007. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA, USA. Data current as of 15 April 2007.

Nyamai, P.A., Goebel, P.C., Hix, D.M., Corace, R.G. and Drobyshev, I.,
2014. Fire history, fuels, and overstory effects on the
regeneration-layer dynamics of mixed-pine forest ecosystems of eastern
Upper Michigan, USA. Forest ecology and management, 322, pp.37-47.

Quinby, P.A. 1991. Self-replacement in old-growth white pine forests of
Temagami, Ontario. For. Ecol. Management 41:95-109.

Turner, M.G., R.H. Gardner, V.H. Dale and R.V. O\'Neill. 1989.
Predicting the spread of

disturbance across heterogeneous landscapes. Oikos 55:121-129.

USNVC \[United States National Vegetation Classification\]. 2016. United
States National Vegetation Classification Database, V2.01. Federal
Geographic Data Committee, Vegetation Subcommittee, Washington DC.

USDA Forest Service, Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Forest
Plan Revision for the Chippewa and Superior National Forests, 2004.

White, M.A. and Host, G.E., 2008. Forest disturbance frequency and patch
structure from pre-European settlement to present in the Mixed Forest
Province of Minnesota, USA. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 38(8),
pp.2212-2226.

Whitney, G.G. 1986. Relation of Michigan\'s presettlement pine forests
to substrate and

disturbance history. Ecology 67(6):1548-1559.

Zhang, Q., K.S. Pregitzer and D.D. Reed. 1999. Catastrophic disturbance
in the presettlement forests of the Upper Peninsula of MI. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research 29:106-114.
