# 13651 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Boreal White Spruce-Fir-Hardwood Forest - Inland {#boreal-white-spruce-fir-hardwood-forest---inland .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 4/17/2018

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                            **Reviewers**   
  --------------- ----------------------- --------------- ----------------
  Joshua Cohen    cohenjo@michigan.gov    Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  Kimberly Hall   hallkim@msu.edu                         

                                                          
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51

Model Splits or Lumps

This BpS is lumped with 1301

Geographic Range

Boreal forest is a circumboreal formation that has existed as a dominant
assemblage in the northern Great Lakes region of the United States and
Canada for \~10,000yrs, following the retreat of the glaciers. Within
North American, boreal forest is primarily found throughout Canada,
ranging into Alaska. Within the Lake states and Ontario province, boreal
forest is found in central Ontario, throughout northern Minnesota, along
the tip of the Door Peninsula in Lake Michigan and along the Lake
Superior shoreline in Wisconsin, and within northern Michigan. Within
Michigan, this forest type is predominantly found on Great Lakes islands
and along coastal areas of the northernmost portion of the Lower
Peninsula and throughout the Upper Peninsula; less frequently boreal
forest occurs in localized inland areas of Michigan. Interpretation of
notes of the general land surveyors indicate that circa 1800, boreal
forest primarily occurred in the northern Lower Peninsula in Alpena,
Cheboygan, Charlevoix and Emmet Counties and in the Upper Peninsula,
boreal forest was concentrated in Keweenaw, Chippewa, Ontonogan, Delta
and Mackinac Counties. Inland boreal forest occurs in the northern Lower
Peninsula in section 212H and subsubsections 212HI and 212Hj and
throughout the Upper Peninsula in all sections and subsections (Cleland
et al. 2007). (Flakne 2003, Comer et al. 1995, Stearns et al. 1982,
Maycock and Curtis 1960, Curtis 1959, Nichols 1935). System occurs in
north central MN and the arrowhead region with deep, nutrient-rich,
fine-textured soils.

Biophysical Site Description

Boreal forest typically occupies upland sites, (often with local wet
places), along shores of the Great Lakes, on islands in the Great Lakes
(e.g. Isle Royale, Drummond Island, Beaver Island) and locally inland
(e.g. restricted areas in the Negaunee Michigamme Highlands). Boreal
forests occur primarily on sand dunes, in glacial lakeplains, and on
thin soil over bedrock, both igneous and calcareous (e.g., limestone and
dolomite cobble or pavement). Inland boreal forest of MI are typically
found on moderately drained lakeplain and outwash deposits. Within
lakeplain, boreal forest is often found in areas with poorly expressed
dune and swale topography. Topography of these systems is typically flat
to gently sloping.

Sand, loamy sand and sandy loam soils are typically moderately acid to
neutral, but heavier soils (e.g., silty loam and clay loams) and more
acid and alkaline conditions are found. Boreal forests that occur over
limestone bedrock or cobble often are characterized by shallow organic
soils or mull humus. Conifer dominance in the canopy results in a litter
layer that is typically more acidic than the underlying organic and
mineral soils. Water-retaining capacity of the soils is variable with
sandy soils typically being well-drained and soils with heavier texture,
such as loams, ranging from moderately drained to poorly drained. Inland
boreal forest systems usually occur on moderately drained lakeplain or
outwash (Comer et al. 1995, Stearns et al. 1982, Curtis 1959).

In Minnesota, boreal forest occurs on soils that are deeper or
finer-textured than soils in the jack pine forest that allowed
development of dense forests of mixed aspen, birch, balsam fir, white
spruce and red maple (Frelich and Reich 1998). This community occurs in
upland positions, often with loamy shallow soils within
bedrock-controlled landforms (Heinselman 1996).

Vegetation Description

Dominated by *Abies balsamea, Picea glauca,* and *Thuja occidentalis*
with *Betula papyrifera* and *Populus tremuloides*, shifting toward
*Betula* and *Populus* following fire events, and towards conifers in
the absence of fire. *Thuja occidentalis* dominance is most prevalent in
sand dunes and on thin soils over neutral-alkaline bedrock or glacial
deposits, such as in the Straits of Mackinac and in northeastern Lower
Peninsula (Comer et al. 1995). White spruce is more prevalent on drier
sites while balsam fir is more common on wetter sites (Curtis 1959).
Additional canopy associates include *Pinus strobus, Populus
balsamifera,* and *Tsuga canadensis* and, less frequently, *Picea
mariana, Pinus resinosa, Pinus banksiana*, and *Acer rubrum*. In
contrast to coastal boreal forests, inland systems are often
characterized by an increased canopy component of *Pinus strobus* and
*Tsuga canadensis* and deciduous species as the result of more frequent
fire disturbance (Comer et al. 1995, Curtis 1959). *Acer spicatum, A.
pennsylvanicum, Sorbus americana* and *S. decorus* are characteristic of
the subcanopy and understory. Where *Populus* and/or *Betula* dominate
the canopy, conifers are prevalent in the subcanopy and understory.
Additional understory or tall shrub species include *Cornus rugosa*,
*Alnus rugosa* and *Sheperdia canadensis*. Characteristic low shrubs
include *Lonicera canadensis, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Taxus canadensis,
Ribes cynosbati, Vaccinium myrtilloides, Diervilla lonicera, Juniperus
communis,* and *Rubus pubescens*. Groundlayer species are a mix of
species found in mesic northern forest and northern swamp types, but
prominent among them are *Actaea rubra, Aralia nudicaulis, Aster
macrophyllus, Carex eburnea, C. deweyana, Clintonia borealis, Coptis
trifolia, Cornus candensis, Drypoteris* spp., *Galium triflorum,
Goodyera* spp. (i.e*., G. oblongifolia* and *G. repens*), *Linnaea
borealis, Mainthemum canadense, Mitella nuda, Mitchella repens,
Pteridium aquilinum, Polygala paucifolia, Smilacina stellata, Streptopus
roseus, Trientalis borealis,* and *Viola* spp. Cypripedium arietinum and
*Iris lacustris* are uncommon, but characteristic. Mosses and Usnea
lichens often are abundant due to favorable, moist conditions (MNFI
Database 2007, Rutkowski and Stottlemyer 1993, Harman and Plough 1986,
Stearns et al. 1982, Buell and Martin 1961, Maycock and Curtis 1960,
Curtis 1959, Buell and Niering 1957, Potzger 1941, Darlington 1940,
Grant 1934).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ABBA         *Abies balsamea*                 Balsam fir

  PIGL         *Picea glauca*                   White spruce

  THOC2        *Thuja occidentalis*             Arborvitae

  BEPA         *Betula papyrifera*              Paper birch

  POTR5        *Populus tremuloides*            Quaking aspen

  PIST         *Pinus strobus*                  Eastern white pine

  TSCA         *Tsuga canadensis*               Eastern hemlock
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Natural disturbance regime characterized by frequent windthrow and
insect epidemics, which are typically small-scale events. *Choristoneura
fumiferana* (Spruce budworm) defoliates both spruce and balsam fir but
tends to be more detrimental to the later (Curtis 1959). Interactions of
blowdowns, insects and climate (i.e., droughts) influence fire regimes
of boreal forests. Infrequent catastrophic fires are an important
disturbance factor (Curtis 1959), especially in inland boreal forests.
Estimations for fire return interval for Canadian boreal forests range
from 74-142yrs (Larsen and MacDonald 1998). We estimate that the fire
return interval for the inland boreal forests of Michigan probably
ranged from 200-300yrs given that these systems occurred as patches in a
matrix of a range of community types with varying fire regimes compared
to the extensive, homogenous, flammable Canadian boreal forest. We also
estimate that wind disturbance was more prevalent along the Great Lakes
shoreline compared to inland systems. Large-scale disturbance events in
boreal forests can lead to the development of even-aged stands while
small-scale disturbance factors can lead to uneven-aged systems (Comer
et al. 1995, Stearns et al. 1982, Maycock and Curtis 1960, Curtis 1959).

Selective browsing by moose in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (Isle
Royale) can result in the alteration of species composition, community
structure, and ultimately forest successional patterns of boreal
forests. On sites with spruce and balsam fir, moose preferentially
browse on balsam fir retarding fir vertical growth, limiting fir
abundance and imparting a competitive advantage to spruce (Risenhoover
and Maass 1987).

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Infrequent fires burned large areas (100s-1000s of acres), killing all
or most overstory species. Small-scale outbreaks of spruce budworm
likely occurred every 30-60yrs, killing primarily balsam fir over small
scale (tens to hundreds of acres); occasional wind storms blew down
trees over small scale (10 or more acres).

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

This system was mapped separately from 5113442 (Great Lakes Spruce Fir),
though there are significant similarities, especially in the
description.

The inland variant of the boreal white spruce-fir hardwood forest is
located more than one km inland within the main portions of the Lower
and Upper Peninsulas. The coastal variant of the boreal white spruce-fir
hardwood forest (511365-1) would be found within approx. one km of the
Great Lakes shoreline and across any island or Peninsula within the
Great Lakes such as Beaver Island, Bois Blanc Island, Drummond island
and the Garden Peninsula.

Mapped as Spruce-Fir-Cedar Forest on Comer et al.\'s (1995) circa 1800
vegetation map. Corresponds to upland spruce-fir dominated current land
cover.

Issues or Problems

Need more research on spruce budworm impacts (what is scale and
intensity of disturbance?). Disturbance return intervals (i.e., fire,
wind and insect) for boreal forests are derived from Canadian systems
and from research from Minnesota. Estimations of fire size are based on
polygon size of spruce-fir-cedar forest from circa 1800 vegetation map
(Comer et al. 1995).

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

High levels of deer herbivory can result in regeneration failure of
cedar.

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 7 Early Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

High density seedling-sapling-pole aspen-birch stand following
stand-replacement fire event. Class A occurs following catastrophic fire
which is assumed to occur at moderate fire frequency (200-300yrs)
compared to coastal boreal forest systems. Low levels of conifer
regeneration, which increase over time through seeding in. Catastrophic
fire exposes mineral soil and reduces conifer competition, imparting
competitive advantage to birch and aspen.

Class A consists of deciduous tree species while class B consists of
coniferous tree species.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class B 22 Early Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ --------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  ABBA         Abies balsamea        Balsam fir         Upper

  PIGL         Picea glauca          White spruce       Upper

  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis    Arborvitae         Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

High density seedling-sapling-pole fir-spruce-cedar stand following
catastrophic windthrow and moderate severity fire which leave adequate
seed source to impart competitive advantage to conifers over early
successional hardwoods.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class C 7 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper

  ABBA         Abies balsamea         Balsam fir         Low-Mid

  PIGL         Picea glauca           White spruce       Low-Mid
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mature aspen-birch with spruce-fir-cedar understory development.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 64 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**  **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                         Position**
  ------------ -------------------- -------------------- ------------------
  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis   Arborvitae           Upper

  PIGL         Picea glauca         White spruce         Upper

  ABBA         Abies balsamea       Balsam fir           Upper

  PIST         Pinus strobus        Eastern white pine   None
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Spruce-fir-cedar forest with canopy associates *including Populus
tremuloides, Betula papyrifera, Pinus strobus, Populus grandidentata,
Pinus resinosa, Pinus banksiana, Picea mariana*, and *Tsuga canadensis*.
Populus tremuloides

,

Betula papyrifera

,

Pinus strobus

,

Populus grandidentata

,

Pinus resinosa

,

Pinus banksiana

,

Picea mariana

,

and

Tsuga

canadensis

.

Populus tremuloides

,

Betula papyrifera

,

Pinus strobus

,

Populus grandidentata

,

Pinus resinosa

,

Pinus banksiana

,

Picea mariana

,

and

Tsuga

canadensis

.

Spruce budworm and small-scale windthrow events create small canopy gaps
which maintain uneven-aged structure. Frequency of large-scale insect
events needs further research.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Buell, M.F., and W.A. Niering. 1957. Fir-spruce-birch forest in northern
Minnesota. Ecology 38(4): 602-610.

Buell, M.F., and W.E. Gordon. 1945. Hardwood-conifer forest contact zone
in Itasca Park, Minnesota. American Midland Naturalist 34(2): 433-439.

Buell, M.F., and W.E. Martin. 1961. Competition between maple-basswood
and fir-spruce communities in Itasca Park, Minnesota. Ecology 42(2):
428-429.

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A.

Corner, and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan's presettlement vegetation, as
interpreted from the General Land Office Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. Digital map.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Darlington, H.T. 1940. Some vegetational aspects of Beaver Island, Lake
Michigan. Papers of the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters
25: 31-37.

Flakne, R. 2003. The Holocene vegetation history of Isle Royale National
Park, Michigan, USA. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 33: 1144-1166.

Frelich, L.E., and P.B. Reich. 1998. Disturbance severity and threshold
responses in the boreal forest. Conservation Ecology \[online\] 2(2): 7.

Grant, M.L. 1934. The climax forest community in Itasca County,
Minnesota, and its bearing upon the successional status of the pine
community. Ecology 15(3): 243-257.

Harman, J.R., and J. Plough. 1986. Asymmetric distribution of coniferous
trees on northern Lake Michigan Islands. The East Lakes Geographer 21:
24-33.

Heinselman, M. 1996. The Boundary Waters Wilderness Ecosystem.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Heinselman, M.L. 1973. Fire in the virgin forests of the Boundary Waters
Canoe Area, Minnesota. Journal of Quaternary Research 3: 329-382.

Larsen, C.P.S. and MacDonald, G.M. 1998. An 840-year record of fire and
vegetation in a boreal white spruce forest. Ecology 79: 106-118.

Maycock, P.F., and J.T. Curtis. 1960. The phytosociology of boreal
conifers -- Hardwood forests of the Great Lakes Region. Ecological
Monographs 30: 1-35.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory. Natural History Database-BIOTICS.
2007.

Nichols, G.E. 1935. The hemlock-white pine-northern hardwood region of
eastern North

America. Ecology 16: 403-422.

Potzger, J.E. 1941. The vegetation of Mackinac Island, Michigan: An
ecological survey.

American Midland Naturalist 25(2): 298-323.

Risenhoover, K.L., and S.A. Maass. 1987. The influence of moose on
composition and

structure of Isle Royale forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research
17: 357-364.

Rutkowski, D.R., and R. Stottlemyer. 1993. Composition, biomass, and
nutrient distribution in mature northern hardwood and boreal forest
stands, Michigan. American Midland Naturalist 130(1): 13-30.

Stearns et al. 1982. Ecology and geology of the Superior Upland Region:
A theme study

for the National Park Service.
