# 13660 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Laurentian-Acadian Pine-Hemlock-Hardwood Forest {#laurentian-acadian-pine-hemlock-hardwood-forest .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                              **Reviewers**   
  ---------------- ------------------------ --------------- ----------------
  David Price      priced1@michigan.gov     Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  Beverly Braden   bbraden@consultant.com   None            None

  Dave Cleland     dcleland@fs.fed.us       None            None
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Reviewed by:** Brad Slaughter

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51, 63, 64, 65, 66

Model Splits or Lumps

Geographic Range

Laurentian Acadian Pine Hemlock Hardwood Forest occurs the northeastern
United States and maritime Canada west to Ontario, Wisconsin, and
Michigan (Gawler & Faber-Langendoen 2015).

Within Hiawatha National Forest (Section 212R), Laurentian-Acadian
pine-hemlock-hardwood forest is estimated to have covered ca. 70,000 ha
(175,000 ac) at the time of the General Land Office (GLO) Surveys (Comer
et al. 1995). The system was widespread in large patches in Mackinac,
Chippewa, Alger, Scholcraft, and Delta Counties.

Biophysical Site Description

Presettlement forests of eastern hemlock, eastern white pine, and yellow
birch commonly occurred on a variety of landforms, ranging from ravines,
slopes, and summits in hilly or mountainous terrain to moist, moderately
drained silty/clayey lake plains, moderate to poorly-drained till
plains, outwash and lake plains and drumlin fields (Thompson and
Sorenson 2005; Albert and Comer 2008; Sperduto and Kimball 2011). This
assemblage was often found around lake and bog margins and in complex
mosaics with (beech-)sugar maple-hemlock forest on the surrounding
better-drained soils. Elevations are low to moderate, generally \<
2000ft. Soil textures range from fine-textured sands to till and clay,
and chemistry is acidic to circumneutral. The region has a cool
snow-forest climate with warm summers. The daily maximum temperature in
July ranges from 24 to 29 째C (75 to 85 째F) and the daily minimum
temperature in January ranges from -21 to -9 째C (-5 to 15 째F). The mean
length of freeze-free days is between 90 to 160 days and the average
number of days per year with snow cover of 2.5cm or more is between 80
and 140 days. The normal annual total precipitation ranges from 610 to
1270 mm (Albert et al. 1986, Barnes 1991).

In the HNF, hemlock -- white pine forests and hemlock -- yellow birch
forests occurred in small to large patches in landscape positions on
lake plains and outwash plains between higher, better-drained beech --
maple -- hemlock forests (or, occasionally, drier pine forests) and a
variety of wetlands (e.g., rich conifer swamp, muskeg, poor fen,
patterned fen, bog, northern wet meadow), lakes, and streams. It also
occurred less frequently on thin till over bedrock and in dune-and-swale
complexes adjacent to Lake Michigan (Albert & Comer 2008).

Vegetation Description

Typical canopy dominants or codominants are Tsuga canadensis (eastern
hemlock), Pinus strobus (white pine) and Betula alleghaniensis (yellow
birch). Other components of the canopy can include Abies balsamea
(balsam fir), Thuja occidentalis (white cedar), Picea rubens (red
spruce), and several hardwoods, especially Acer rubrum (red maple), but
also A. saccharum (sugar maple), Fagus grandifolia (beech), and Quercus
rubra (red oak), although hardwoods comprise \<75% of the canopy (Gawler
& Faber-Langendoen 2015). Subcanopy, shrub, and ground layer cover and
diversityare low due to the nutrient-poor and acidic mor humus as well
as the low understory light intensity caused by the perpetually dense
hemlock canopy (Curtis, 1959). Characteristic species of these substrata
include conifer and hardwood seedlings and saplings, Viburnum
acerifolium (maple-leaved viburnum), Hamamelis virginiana (witch-hazel),
Lonicera canadensis (Canadian fly honeysuckle), Maianthemum canadense
(Canada mayflower), Trientalis borealis (starflower), Medeola virginiana
(Indian cucumber-root), Mitchella repens (partridge-berry), Aralia
nudicaulis (wild sarsaparilla), Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen).
Coptis trifolia (goldthread), Oxalis acetosella (northern wood-sorrel),
Dryopteris intermedia (intermediate wood fern), Spinulum annotinum
(stiff clubmoss), Huperzia lucidula (shining clubmoss), and scattered
bryophytes (Thompson & Sorenson 2005; Gawler & Cutko 2010; Reznicek et
al. 2011; Sperduto & Kimball 2011).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  TSCA         *Tsuga canadensis*               Eastern hemlock

  BEAL2        *Betula alleghaniensis*          Yellow birch

  PIST         *Pinus strobus*                  Eastern white pine
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Disturbance and successional dynamics in the hemlock-birch-pine type are
driven by wind events. Tree falls and crown removal are the primary
results from the wind disturbance in conjunction with the shallow root
systems of the hemlock and white pine. The wind events that can occur
are downbursts and microbursts from thunderstorms, tornados, and general
circulation winds around severe low-pressure systems. Data for long-term
events is estimated from current conditions and sparse historical data.
Heavy, catastrophic windstorms and tornados are estimated to have
occurred at \>1000yr intervals. Estimates of rotation periods for wind
events range from 1200-2400yrs (Whitney 1986). Insect attacks follow
wind or ice storm damage, and contribute to the break-up of the stands,
generating large amounts of coarse, woody debris.

There is limited data for wind event disturbances. The wind events
generated large amounts of coarse woody debris. Rare broad-scale
catastrophic storm and fire interactions resulted in fire rotations of
more than a thousand years (Cleland et al. 2004, Ziegler 2002, Woods
2000, Canham and Loucks 1984, Frelich and Lorimer 1991, Grimm 1984,
Runkle 1982, Whitney 1986). Most of these fires were severe surface
fires that occurred only after prolonged drought and insect/disease
events. The fire cycle for such forests must have been erratic, with
intervals of 200-300yrs plausible. Concomitant with surface fires,
ground fires that consume organic horizons can also occur under
unusually dry conditions (VanDeMark 2006). These may be especially
important in high-moisture sites where considerable depth of organic
deposits accumulate under predominantly hemlock canopies. Fire Regime V
applies to this system.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Landscape must be adequate in size to contain natural variation in
vegetation and disturbance regime. Replacement fires at 400-500yrs may
be in the thousands of acres. Surface and mixed fires could be less than
10ac.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

This system is distinguished from other similar systems by a strong pine
and/or hemlock component and the potential to succeed to
hemlock-dominated stands; this would have been possible under the
natural disturbance regime and given natural densities of seed sources.
Historical harvesting and subsequent repeated fires in the late 1800s
and early 1900s have allowed some expansion of BpS 1302
(Laurentian-Acadian Northern Hardwood Forest) and BpS 1362-2
(Laurentian-Acadian Northern Pine-Oak Forest) onto sites formerly
occupied by this type, particularly due to dramatic decreases in
available hemlock seed sources. Expansion and comingling of 1302 would
generally be restricted to more loamy and nutrient rich soils.
Comingling with 1362-2 would occur primarily near sites with
historically more frequent fire. Lack of hemlock seed sources and
hemlock recruitment on the landscape would effectively convert this to
1362-2 during the later successional stages. Historical data sources
will be required to correctly depict the historic distribution of this
type.

Decline of hemlock due to infestation by hemlock woolly adelgid (Adelges
tsugae) may result in conversion of this type to Laurentian-Acadian
Hardwood Forest with expansions of hardwoods such as beech and yellow
birch into areas formerly dominated by hemlock, although this decline
may take decades or longer in areas infested with HWA, and may be
impacted by coincident infestation of stands by pests of competing
hardwoods such as beech scale (Cryptococcus fagisuga) (Jenkins et al.
2000; Morin & Liebhold 2015).

Issues or Problems

Much of this type was heavily altered during landscape-scale historical
harvesting in the late 1800's and early 1900's (Mladenoff and Pastor
1993), primarily resulting in a drastic reduction of hemlock seed
sources on the landscape. Current recruitment of hemlock may be limited
not only by this reduced distribution of seed sources, but also from
significant rates of browsing by white-tailed deer (Carey 1993).

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 3 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Openings. 0-10yrs following a replacement event in classes A, B and C.
May be characterized by other species including Acer saccharum (sugar
maple), Betula alleghaniensis (yellow birch), Ostrya virginiana
(ironwood), Populus grandidentata (bigtooth aspen), and Pinus strobus
(white pine) depending on surrounding unburned forest types.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Seedling \<4.5ft

Class B 16 Early Development 2 - Closed

Upper Layer Lifeform: Tree

Upper Layer Canopy Cover: 71 - 90%

Upper Layer Canopy Height: Tree 5.1m - Tree 10m

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  QURU         Quercus rubra          Northern red oak    Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch         Upper

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen       Upper

  ACRU         Acer rubrum            Red maple           Upper

  POGR4        Populus Grandidentata  Bigtooth aspen      Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Post replacement regeneration with early seral species.

Balsam fir could occasionally become established during this class, but
would have been primarily limited to the understory and midstory strata.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\"DBH

Class C 39 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Upper Layer Lifeform: Tree

Upper Layer Canopy Cover: 51 - 90%

Upper Layer Canopy Height: Tree 5.1m - Tree 10m

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**       **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- --------------------- -------------------
  PIST         Pinus strobus       Eastern white pine    Upper

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa      Red pine              Upper

  TSCA         Tsuga canadensis    Eastern hemlock       Upper

  BEAL2        Betula              Yellow birch          Upper
               alleghaniensis                            
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Stands consist of red pine, white pine, eastern hemlock and yellow
birch.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 42 Late Development 1 - Closed

Upper Layer Lifeform: Tree

Upper Layer Canopy Cover: 51 - 100%

Upper Layer Canopy Height: Tree 10.1m - Tree 50m

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- -------------------- ------------------
  PIST         Pinus strobus          Eastern white pine   Upper

  TSCA         Tsuga canadensis       Eastern hemlock      Upper

  BEAL2        Betula alleghaniensis  Yellow birch         Mid-Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Stands consist of mature and old growth hemlock, occasionally mixed with
white pine, yellow birch, and potentially several other associates.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Canham, C.D. and Loucks, O.L., 1984. Catastrophic windthrow in the
presettlement forests of Wisconsin. Ecology 65:803-809.

Carey, J. H. 1993. Tsuga canadensis. In: Fire Effects Information
System, \[Online\]. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available:
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ \[2007, July 2\].

Cleland, D.T., S.C. Saunders, T.R. Crow, D.I. Dickmann, A.L. Maclean,
J.K. Jordan, R.L. Watson and A.M. Sloan, 2004. Characterizing historical
and modern fire regimes in the Lake States: A landscape ecosystem
approach. Landscape Ecology 19: 311--325.

Cleland, D.T., S.C. Saunders, K.D. Brosofske, A.L. Maclean, J.K. Jordan,
R.L. Watson, A.M. Sloan, T.M. Scupien, T.R. Crow and D.I. Dickmann,
2003. Ongoing project to determine historical and modern wind and fire
regimes, fire risk, and historical landscape and community composition
and structure in the Lake States and R-9 National Forests.

Cohen, J.G. 2000. Natural community abstract for mesic northern forest.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 7 pp.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Davis, M.B., Sugita, S., Calcote, R.R., Ferrari, J.B. and Frelich, L.E.
1994. Historical development of alternate communities in a hemlock
hardwood forest in northern Michigan, U.S.A. In Large Scale Ecology and
Conservation Biology: The 35th Symposium of the British Ecological
Society with the Society for Conservation Biology, pp. 19-39. Edited by
P.J. Edwards, R.M. May and N.R. Webb. University of Southampton.
Blackwell Scientific Publications: Boston, MA.

Davis, B.; Sugita, S; Calcote, R. and Frelich, L.E. 1992. Effects of
invasion by Tsuga canadensis on a North American forest ecosystem. In:
Teller, A.; Mathy, P.and Jeffers, J.N.R., Responses of forest ecosystems
to environmental changes. Elsevier Applied Science, London and New York.
P. 34-44.

Doviak, M., Reich, P.B. and Frelich, L.E. 2003. Seed rain, safe sites,
competing vegetation, and soil resources spatially structure white pine
regeneration and recruitment. Can. J. For. Res. 33: 1892--1904.

Eyre, F. H. (ed.), 1980. Forest cover types of the US and Canada.
Society of American Foresters, Washington, D.C.

Frelich, L.E. 1995. Old forests in the Lake States today and before
European settlement. Natural Areas Journal, Vol 15(2): 157-167.

Frelich, L.E. and Lorimer C.G., 1991. Natural disturbance regimes in
hemlock hardwood forests of the Upper Great Lakes Region. Ecological
Monographs 61(2): 159-162.

Gawler, S., and A. Cutko. 2010. Natural landscapes of Maine: A guide to
natural communities and ecosystems. Maine Natural Areas Program, Maine
Department of Conservation, Augusta, Maine. 347 pp.

Gawler, S.C., and D. Faber-Langendoen, mod. J. Drake. 2015. *Tsuga
canadensis* - *Pinus strobus* - *Betula alleghaniensis* Forest Group.
United States National Vegetation Classification. Federal Geographic
Data Committee, Washington, D.C. Accessed: 27 November 2016.

Grimm, E.C., 1984. Fire and other factors controlling the Big Woods
vegetation of Minnesota in the mid-nineteenth century. Ecological
Monographs 54: 291-311.

Guyette, R.P. and D.C. Dey, 1995. Age, size and regeneration of old
growth white pine atDividing Lake Nature Reserve, Algonquin Park,
Ontario. Ontario Ministry of Natural

Resources, Ontario Forest Research Institute, Sault Ste. Marie, Forest
Research Report No. 131, 11 pp.

Heinselman, M.L. 1978. Fire intensity and frequency as factors in the
distribution and structure of northern ecosytems. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Fire Regimes and Ecosystem properties, Dec. 11-15, 1978.
Honolulu, HI. GTR. WO 26. pp 7-56.

Holla, T.A. and Knowles, P. 1988. Age structure analysis of a virgin
white pine, Pinus strobus,population. Canadian Field-Naturalist. 102(2):
221-226.

Jenkins, J.C., C.D. Canham, and P.K. Barten. 2000. Predicting long-term
forest development following hemlock mortality. Pages. 62-75. in McManus
KA, Shields KS, Souto DR, eds. Symposium on Sustainable Management of
Hemlock Ecosystems in Eastern North America. Newton Square (PA): USDA
Forest Service. General Technical Report NE-267.

Mladenoff, D.J., and J. Pastor. 1993. Sustainable forest ecosystems in
the northern hardwood and conifer forest region: concepts and
management. Pages 145-179 in: Defining sustainable forestry, Aplet,
G.H., N. Johnson, J.T. Olson, and V.A. Sample (eds.). Island Press,
Washington, D.C.

Morin, R.S., and A.M. Liebhold. 2015. Invasions by two non-native
insects alter regional forest species composition and successional
trajectories. Forest Ecology and Management 341: 67-74.

NatureServe, 2005. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Systems of the Great Lakes Region US: Draft
legend for Landfire Project. NatureServe Central Databases. Arlington,
VA. Data current as of 13 January 2005.

Quinby, P.A. 1991. Self-replacement in old-growth white pine forests of
Temagami, Ontario. For. Ecol. Manage. 41: 95--109.

Rogers, R.S. 1978. Forests dominated by hemlock (Tsuga canadensis):
distribution as related to site and post-settlement history. Canadian
Journal of Botany 56:834-854.

Schulte, L.A., D.J. Mladenoff and E.V. Nordheum, 2002. Quantitative
classification of a historic northern Wisconsin (U.S.A.) landscape:
mapping forests at regional scales. Can. J. For. Res. 32: 1616--1638.

Sperduto, D., and B. Kimball. 2011. The nature of New Hampshire: Natural
communities of the Granite State. University of New Hampshire Press,
Durham, New Hampshire. 341 pp.

Runkle, James Reade, 1982. Patterns of disturbance in some old growth
mesic forests of eastern North America. Ecology. 63(5): 1533-1546.

Thompson, E.H., and E.R. Sorenson. 2005. Wetland, woodland, wildland: A
guide to the natural communities of Vermont. Vermont Department of Fish
and Wildlife and The Nature Conservancy, Montpelier, VT. 456 pp.

USDA Forest Service, 1973. Silvicultural systems for the major forest
types of the United States. U.S. Dep. Agric. Handb. 445, 124 pp.

VanDeMark, J.R. 2006. The effects and implications of ground fire in
northern hemlock-hardwood forests. Unpublished M.S. Thesis, Northern
Michigan University, Marquette, MI. 65 pp.

Whitney, G.G. 1986. Relation of Michigan\'s Presettlement Pine Forests
to Substrate and Disturbance History. Ecology 67(6): 1548-1559.

Woods, K.D. 2000. Long-term change and spatial pattern in a
late-successional hemlock-northern hardwood forest. Journal of Ecology
88: 267-282.

Ziegler, S.S., 2002. Disturbance regimes of hemlock-dominated old-growth
forests in northernNew York, U.S.A. Can. J. For. Res. 32(12): 2106-2115.
