# 13950 {#section .BpS_Title}

# North-Central Oak Barrens {#north-central-oak-barrens .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 4/12/2018

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                         **Reviewers**   
  -------------- --------------------- --------------- -----------------------------
  Michael Kost   kostma@michigan.org   Robert Dana     Robert.Dana@dnr.state.mn.us

  Nancy Brakar   nbraker@tnc.org       Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  Chris Weber    weberc@michigan.org   Alan Haney      ahaney@uwsp.edu
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Steppe/Savanna

Map Zone

51

Geographic Range

Northern-central oak barrens occur in a complex, shifting mosaic with
open prairie, oak savanna and dry oak woodlands in the upper Midwest.
This type occurs in southern lower Michigan, northwestern Ohio, northern
Indiana, northeastern Illinois, southern Wisconsin and southeastern to
northwestern Minnesota. The system is found in Sections (Cleland et al.
2007): 222J: b, h, g and c.

Biophysical Site Description

North-central oak barrens occur on well-drained, nearly level to
slightly undulating sandy glacial outwash, and less often on sandy
moraines or ice contact features. Oak barrens typically occur in the
driest landscape positions, such as ridge tops, steep slopes, south and
west facing slopes and flat sand plains. This xeric, fire-prone
community is characterized by soils that are infertile, coarse-textured,
well-drained sand or loamy sand with medium to slightly acid pH and low
water retaining capacity. Soils contain low organic matter and lack the
fine-textured alluvial horizon associated with soils of the oak openings
(oak savannas) and are thus more droughty. Oak barrens typically occur
in bands surrounding prairie (Chapman et al. 1995, Michigan Natural
Features Inventory 2003). In general, oak barrens are most prevalent on
the western side of major firebreaks such as rivers (Leitner et al.
1991, Grimm 1984, Curtis 1959). In the 1800s, the oak savanna
communities (e.g., oak barrens, oak openings, oak savannas) covered some
11-13 million ha (27-32 million ac) of the Midwest (Nuzzo 1986).

Vegetation Description

The oak barrens community is a heterogeneous savanna vegetation type
with variable physiognomy in time and space. Structurally, oak barrens
range from dense thickets of brush and understory oak grubs within a
matrix of grassland to park-like open woods of widely spaced mature oak
with virtually no shrub or sub-canopy layer above the open forb and
graminoid understory (Chapman et al. 1995, Bowles and McBride 1998,
Michigan Natural Features Inventory 2003. The physiognomic variations,
which occur along a continuum, are the function of the complex interplay
between fire frequency and intensity (Chapman et al. 1995). Typically,
oak barrens grade into prairie on one edge and dry forest on the other.
As noted by Bray (1958) and Curtis (1959), the flora of this community
is a mixture of prairie and forest species, with prairie forbs and
grasses more abundant in high light areas and forest forbs and woody
species in the areas of low light.

The canopy layer generally varies from 5-60% cover (Chapman et al. 1995)
and is dominated or co-dominated by *Quercus velutina* (black oak) and
*Quercus alba* (white oak). These species of oak are also prevalent in
the sub-canopy in shrubby clumps, especially where fire intensity is
high. In addition, *Acer rubrum* (red maple), *Prunus serotina* (black
cherry), *Populus grandidentata* (bigtooth aspen), *Populus tremuloides*
(trembling aspen) and *Quercus ellipsoidalis* (northern pin oak) are
often found in the overstory and sub-canopy of this community. Northern
pin oak is especially common on excessively intermediate sites.
Prevalent species of the subcanopy layer include *Cornus* spp. (dogwood
species), *Corylus americana* (American hazelnut), *Prunus* spp. (cherry
species) and *Sassafras albidum* (sassafras).

Characteristic shrubs include: *Amelanchier* spp. (serviceberry),
*Arctostaphylos uva-ursi* (bearberry), *Ceanothus americanus* (New
Jersey tea), *Comptonia peregrina* (sweetfern), *Corylus americana,
Cornus* spp., *Corylus cornuta* (beaked hazelnut), *Cratageus* spp.
(hawthorn species), *Gaultheria procumbens* (wintergreen), *Gaylussacia
baccata* (huckleberry), *Prunus americana* (wild plum), *Prunus
virginiana* (choke cherry), *Prunus pumila* (sand cherry), *Rosa
carolina* (pasture rose), *Rubus flagellaris* (northern dewberry),
*Salix humilis* (prairie or upland willow) and *Vaccinium angustifolium*
(low sweet blueberry) and in Michigan, *Rhus copalina* (shining sumac)
and *Ptelea trifoliate* (hop tree), and *Quercus prinoides* (dwarf
chestnut or dwarf chinkapin oak).

The ground layer is dominated by graminoids and forbs. Common species
include *Scizhachyrium scoparium* (little bluestem), *Andropogon
gerardii* (big bluestem) and *Carex pensylvanica* (Pennsylvania sedge),
with Pennsylvania sedge often replacing the bluestems in shaded areas
and fire-suppressed communities. Other prevalent herbs of the oak
barrens include: *Aster oolentangiensis* (sky-blue aster), *Aureolaria*
spp. (false foxglove), *Coreopsis lanceolata* (tickseed), *Cyperus
filiculmis* (nut grass), *Danthonia spicata* (poverty oats),
*Deschampsia flexuosa* (hair grass), *Euphorbia corollata* (flowering
spurge), *Helianthus divaricatus* (tall sunflower), *Hypericum
perforatum* (St. John's-wort), *Koeleria macrantha* (June grass),
*Krigia biflora* (dwarf dandelion), *Lathyrus ochroleucus* (white pea),
*Lespedeza hirta* (hairy lespedeza), *Liatris aspera* (blazing star),
*Liatris cylindrica* (dwarf blazing star), *Lupinus perennis* (wild
lupine), *Monarda fistulosa* (wild bergamot), *Panicum implicatum*
(grass panicum), *Pedicularis canadensis* (wood betony), *Stipa
avenacea* (needle grass), *Stipa spartea* (needle grass), *Tephrosia
virginiana* (goats-rue) and *Viola pedata* (birdfoot violet).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  QUAL         *Quercus alba*                   White oak

  QUEL         *Quercus ellipsoidalis*          Northern pin oak

  QUVE         *Quercus velutina*               Black oak

  ANGE         *Andropogon gerardii*            Big bluestem

  CORYL        *Corylus*                        Hazelnut

  SCHIZ4       *Schizachyrium*                  Little bluestem

  GABA         *Gaylussacia baccata*            Black huckleberry

  CAPE6        *Carex pensylvanica*             Pennsylvania sedge
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Cottam (1949) and Curtis (1959) suggested that oak savannas originated
when prairie fires spread into surrounding closed oak forest with enough
intensity to create open canopy conditions (also see Anderson and Brown
1986, Anderson and Bowles 1999). Other researchers have proposed that
savannas also originated following invasion of prairie by oaks during
prolonged lulls in annual fire regimes (Anderson and Bowles 1999, Grimm
1984). Repeated low-intensity fires working in concert with drought and
windthrow then maintained these savannas (Faber-Langendoen and Tester
1993, Curtis 1959, Stout 1946). Within dry-mesic savanna systems, such
as oak openings, it is likely that annual or nearly annual fire
disturbance was the primary abiotic factor influencing savanna structure
and composition. Fires prevented canopy closure and the dominance of
woody vegetation (Leitner et al. 1991). Presently, the prevalent
catalyst of fires is lightning strike, but historically, Native
Americans played an integral role in the fire regime, accidentally
and/or intentionally setting fire to prairie and savanna ecosystems
(Anderson and Bowles 1999, Bowles and McBride 1998, Dorney and Dorney
1989, Chapman 1984, Grimm 1984, Day 1953). Where large-scale herbivores
(i.e., elk and bison) were abundant, grazing may have helped inhibit the
succession of oak savanna to woodland (Ritchie et al. 1998, McClain et
al. 1993).

The character of oak barrens can differ dramatically, primarily as the
result of varying fire intensity and frequency, which are influenced by
climatic conditions, soil texture, topography, size of physiographic and
vegetative units, and landscape context (i.e., proximity to water bodies
and fire-resistant and fire-conducive plant communities) (Anderson and
Bowles 1999, Chapman et al. 1995, Bowles et al. 1994, Grimm 1984).
Historically, fire regimes were also influenced by the number and
distribution of indigenous peoples (Chapman 1984). Infrequent,
high-intensity fires may kill mature oaks and produce savannas and
barrens covered by abundant scrubby oak sprouts. Park-like openings with
widely spaced trees and an open graminoid/forb understory are maintained
by frequent, low-intensity fires, which occur often enough to restrict
maturation of oak seedlings and encroachment by other woody species
(Peterson and Reich 2001, Chapman et al. 1995, Faber-Langendoen and
Davis 1995).

Oak wilt occurred on barrens likely resulting in mortality of larger oak
groups especially when they occurred in high densities.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

The expected fire regimes for this type are I (frequent ground fires)
and III (mixed severity). The ground fire was the more commonly
occurring fire disturbance, but when dry conditions combined with dense
stand conditions, a mixed-severity fire could result, with the fire
crowning into the canopy where fuel ladders were present. The scale of
these fires is thought to occur on 10s of 1,000s of acres.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

The northern oak savanna type includes several matrix communities such
as mesic and dry-mesic oak openings, dry oak barrens, mixed oak and
oak-hickory woodlands, and a variety of small and large patch prairie
types. This type includes the following ecological systems:
North-Central Interior Oak Savanna (CES202.698) and North-Central Oak
Barrens (CES202.727).

In the absence of fire and with the prevalence of anthropogenic
disturbance such as logging, off-road vehicle recreation, and livestock
grazing, the following exotic species may be dominant components of the
herbaceous layer of oak barrens: *Agropyron repens* (quack grass),
*Agrostis stolonifera* (creeping bent), *Asparagus officinalis* (wild
asparagus), *Centaurea maculosa* (spotted knapweed), *Hieracium* spp.
(hawkweeds), *Poa compressa* (Canada bluegrass*), Poa pratensis*
(Kentucky bluegrass), *Rumex acetosella* (sheep sorrel) and *Tragopogon
dubius* (goat's beard).

Issues or Problems

Mixed fire probability changed from 500yrs to 40yrs in class C by
reviewer from Missoula Fire Science Laboratory to fix Reference
Condition proportions in LANDSUM (12.170.07). This type covers a broad
geographic range and encompasses a variety of prairie, barrens and
woodland types that may have experienced different surface fire return
intervals ranging from 1-5yrs. Historical fire size is unknown but
historical accounts indicate that vast acreages burned within a single
fire event.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 8 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem        Lower

  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium          Little bluestem     Lower

  GABA         Gaylussacia baccata    Black huckleberry   Low-Mid

  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak           Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Open prairie with grasses and forbs dominating open grasslands with
scattered oak grubs and clumps of shrubs.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Seedling \<4.5ft

Class B 20 Mid Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak           Upper

  GABA         Gaylussacia baccata    Black huckleberry   Low-Mid

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem        Lower

  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium          Little bluestem     Lower
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Although trees and shrubs are the upper layer lifeform this class
contains an understory of prairie grasses and forbs. Maximum tree cover
is low but herbaceous cover can range up to 100%.

Early successional barrens/brush prairie with scattered young oak trees
and clumps of shrubs occur within a matrix of prairie grasses and forbs.

Alternate succession without fire would allow the system to succeed to a
closed class.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class C 67 Late Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak         Upper

  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak         Upper

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem      Low-Mid

  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium          Little bluestem   Lower
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Oak barrens: This is a system of widely-scattered, large-diameter oaks
and shrub clumps within a matrix of prairie grasses and forbs.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

Class D 4 Late Development 2 - Open

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- -------------------- -----------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak            Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak            Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis  Northern pin oak     Upper

  COAM3        Corylus americana      American hazelnut    Middle
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Oak woodland oak-dominated woodland with high stem density. These oak
groves occupy areas of the landscape that frequently escape fire due to
topographic position.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\"DBH

Class E 1 Late Development 3 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- -------------------- -----------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak            Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak            Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis  Northern pin oak     Upper

  COAM3        Corylus americana      American hazelnut    Middle
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This is a closed, oak-dominated forest. These oak groves occupy areas of
the landscape that frequently escape fire due to topographic position.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Abrams, M.D. 1992. Fire and the development of oak forests. BioScience.
42(5): 346-353.

Abrams, M.D. and G.J. Nowacki. 1992. Historical variation in fire, oak
recruitment, and post-logging accelerated succession in central
Pennsylvania. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club. 119: 19-28.

Albert, D.A. 1995. Regional landscape ecosystems of Michigan, Minnesota,
and Wisconsin: A working map and classification. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-178.
St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment
Station. Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center Home Page.
http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/1998/rlandscp/rlandscp.htm. (Version
03JUN98.) 250 pp.

Albertson, F.W. and J.E. Weaver. 1945. Injury and death or recovery of
trees in prairie climate. Ecological Monographs. 15(4): 393-433.

Anderson, R.C. 1991. Illinois prairies: A historical perspective.
Symposium Proceedings: Our Living Heritage: 384-391.

Anderson, R.C. and L.E. Brown. 1986. Stability and instability in plant
communities following fire. American Journal of Botany. 73(3): 364-368.

Anderson, R.C. and M.L. Bowles. 1999. Deep-soil savannas and barrens of
the Midwestern United States. In: Anderson, R.C., J.S. Fralish and J.M.
Baskin, eds. Savannas, Barrens, and Rock Outcrop Plant Communities of
North America. Cambridge, UK: 155-170.

Bader, B.J. 2001. Developing a species list for oak savanna/oak woodland
restoration at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Arboretum. Ecological
Restoration. 19(4): 242-250.

Beal, W.J. 1904. Some of the changes now taking place in a forest of oak
openings. Papers of the Michigan Academy of Science. 4: 107-108.

Bowles, M.L. and J.L. McBride. 1998. Vegetation composition, structure,
and chronological change in a decadent midwestern North American savanna
remnant. Natural Areas Journal. 18(1): 14-27.

Bray, J.R. 1960. The composition of savanna vegetation in Wisconsin.
Ecology. 41(4): 721-732.

Brewer, R. and S. Kitler. 1989. Tree distribution in southwestern
Michigan bur oak openings. Michigan Botanist. 28: 73-79.

Chapman, K.A. 1984. An ecological investigation of native grassland in
Southern Lower Michigan. MA thesis, Western Michigan University. 235 pp.

Chapman, K.A., M.A. White, M.R. Huffman and D. Faber-Langendoen. 1995.
Ecology and stewardship guidelines for oak barrens landscapes in the
upper Midwest. In: Stearns, F. and K. Holland, eds. Proceedings of the
Midwest Oak Savanna Conference, 1993. U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Internet Publications: 1-29. 21 September 2000
http://www.epa.gov/glnpo/oak/oak93/chapman.html.

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Cohen, J.G. 2001. Natural community abstract for oak openings. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. Pp.

Cohen, J.G. 2004a. Natural community abstract for oak openings. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 9 pp.

Cohen, J.G. 2004b. Natural community abstract for bur oak plains.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 13 pp.

Cottam, G. 1949. The phytosociology of an oak woods in southwestern
Wisconsin. Ecology. 30(3): 271-287.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Day, G.M. 1953. The Indian as an ecological factor in the northeastern
forest. Ecology. 34(2): 329-346.

Dorney, C.H. and J.R. Dorney. 1989. An unusual oak savanna in
northeastern Wisconsin: The effects of Indian-caused fire. American
Midland Naturalist. 122(1): 103-113.

Faber-Langendoen, D. 1993. A proposed classification for savannas in the
Midwest. Background paper for the Midwest Oak Savanna Conference, 1993.
18 pp.

Faber-Langendoen, D. and M.A. Davis. 1995. Effects of fire frequency on
tree canopy cover at Allison Savanna, east-central Minnesota, USA.
Natural Areas Journal. 15(4): 319-328.

Faber-Langendoen, D. and J.R. Tester. 1993. Oak mortality in sand
savannas following drought in east-central Minnesota. Bulletin of the
Torrey Botanical Club. 120 (3): 248-256.

Grimm, E.C. 1984. Fire and other factors controlling the Big Woods
vegetation of Minnesota in the mid-nineteenth century. Ecological
Monographs. 54(3): 291-311.

Kline, V.M. 1997. Orchards of oak and a sea of grass. In: S. Packard, S.
and C.F. Mutel, eds. The Tallgrass Restoration Handbook. Island Press,
Washington, DC: 3-21.

Kost, M.A. 2004. Natural community abstract for woodland prairie.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 8 pp.

Lanman, C. 1871. The Red Book of Michigan: Civil, Military and
Biographical History. E.B. Smith & Company, Detroit, MI.

Leach, M.K. and L. Ross. 1995. Midwest oak ecosystems recovery plan: A
call to action.

111 pp.

Leach, M.K. and T.J. Givnish. 1999. Gradients in the composition,
structure, and diversity of remnant oak savannas in southern Wisconsin.
Ecological Monographs. 69(3): 353-374.

Leitner, L.A. C.P. Dunn, G.R. Guntenspergen, F. Stearns and D.M. Sharpe
1991. Effects of site, landscape features, and fire regime on vegetation
patterns in presettlement southern Wisconsin. Landscape Ecology. 5(4):
203-217.

McClain, W.E., M.A. Jenkins, S.E. Jenkins and J.E. Ebinger 1993. Changes
in the woody vegetation of a bur oak savanna remnant in central
Illinois. Natural Areas Journal. 13(2): 108-114.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory, 2003. Draft description of Michigan
natural community types. (Unpublished manuscript revised March 4, 2003.)
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 36 pp.
http://www.msue.msu.edu/mnfi/lists/natural_community_types.pdf.

NatureServe, 2004. NatureServe Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life
\[web application\]. Version 40.0. NatureServe, Arlington, VA. 11
September 2004. \<http://www.natureserve.org/explorer\>.

Nuzzo, V. 1986. Extent and status of Midwest oak savanna: Presettlement
and 1985. Natural Areas Journal. 6(2): 6-36.

Packard, S. 1988. Just a few oddball species: Restoration and the
rediscovery of the tallgrass savanna. Restoration and Management Notes.
6(1): 13-21.

Peters, B.C. 1970. Pioneer evaluation of the Kalamazoo County landscape.
Michigan Academician. 3(2): 15-25.

Peterson, D.W. and P.B. Reich. 2001. Prescribed fire in oak savanna:
Fire frequency effects on stand structure and dynamics. Ecological
Applications. 11(3): 914-927.

Pruka, B. 1995. Lists indicate recoverable oak savannas and oak
woodlands in southern Wisconsin. Restoration and Management Notes 13(1):
124-126.

Pruka, B. and D. Faber-Langendoen. 1995. Midwest oak ecosystem recovery
plan: A call to action. Proceedings of the 1995 Midwest Oak Savanna and
Woodland Ecosystem Conferences. 19 January 2004
http://www.epa.gov/glnpo/ecopage/upland/oak/oak95/app-b.htm.

Ritchie, M.E., D. Tilman and J.M.H Knops. 1998. Herbivore effects on
plant and nitrogen dynamics in oak savanna. Ecology. 79(1) 165-177.

Stout, A.B. 1946. The bur oak openings of southern Wisconsin.
Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Science, Arts and Letters. 36:
141-161.
