# 14770 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Boreal Acidic Peatland Systems {#boreal-acidic-peatland-systems .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                                 **Reviewers**   
  ---------------- --------------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Jim Reinartz     jimr@uwm.edu                Chris Dunham    cdunham@tnc.org

  Christina        christina.isenring@wi.gov   Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us
  Isenring                                                     

  Randy Swaty      rswaty@tnc.org              None            None

  Josh Cohen       cohenjo@michigan.gov                        
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Reviewed by:** Brad Slaughter

Vegetation Type

Woody Wetland

Map Zones

40, 41, 50, 51

Model Splits or Lumps

This BpS is lumped with: 1479 (Central Interior and Appalachian Swamp
Systems), 1481 (Laurentian-Acadian Alkaline Conifer-Hardwood Swamp)

Geographic Range

This system occurs in MI\'s Upper Peninsula, northern lower MI, MN and
WI. It can also be found in scattered location in southern MI and the
central sand plains and Lower Lake Michigan coastal areas of WI. It also
occurs in NY and New England in small bogs. Occurs in 212 (all), 222 (R
all), 222 (Kb,Kc,Ke), 222 (J all) and 222 (Ud, Ua).

Within Hiawatha National Forest (Section 212R), open bog and muskeg are
interpreted to have covered ca. 18,000 ha (44,000 ac) at the time of the
General Land Office Surveys (Comer et al. 1995), although this number is
a significant underestimate because extensive areas of muskeg were
interpreted and mapped as Mixed Conifer Swamp. Mixed Conifer Swamp,
which includes both acidic (e.g., poor conifer swamp, muskeg) and
minerotrophic (e.g., rich conifer swamp) cover types, historically
covered ca. 324,000 ha (800,000 ac) of the HNF (Comer et al. 1995). At
present, acid peatlands are especially prevalent in central and western
Chippewa County and in north-central Delta County.

Biophysical Site Description

Peatlands develop in humid climates where precipitation exceeds
evapotranspiration (Gignac et al. 2000, Halsey and Vitt 2000, Boelter
and Verry 1977). The northern lake states are characterized by a humid,
continental climate with long cold winters and short summers that are
moist and cool to warm (Mitsch and Gosselink 2000, Damman 1990, Boelter
and Verry 1977, Gates 1942). Two landscape features are conducive to the
development of peat; small ice-block basins and poorly-drained, level
terrain such as proglacial outwash plains and glacial lakeplain (Boelter
and Verry 1977; Comer et al. 1995; Cohen 2006). Peatlands occurring on
former glacial lake beds and drainageways tend to be more extensive than
kettle peatlands, which are limited in area by the size of the glacial
ice-block that formed the basin (Lindeman 1941). Peatlands range in size
from a few thousand square meters to several thousand hectares (Futyma
and Miller 1986). The overall topography of peatlands is flat to gently
undulating with microtopography characterized by hummocks and hollows
(NatureServe 2006, Locky et al. 2005, Bubier 1991, Glaser et al. 1981,
Wheeler et al. 1983, Vitt and Slack 1975, Heinselman 1963). The
pronounced microtopography in these systems leads to extreme and
fine-scale gradients in soil moisture and pH (Bridgham et al. 1996).
Climate, topography, near surface geology, soils, and vegetation
influence the hydrology of peatlands (Miller and Futyma 1987). The
accumulation of peat within these systems alters drainage patterns and
raises water tables (Brinson 1993).

Vegetation Description

This system encompasses treed, shrub-dominated, and herb-dominated
sphagnum peatlands, generally known as poor conifer swamp, muskeg, and
bog and/or poor fen. Poor conifer swamps are characterized by a canopy
of coniferous trees, low ericaceous, evergreen shrubs, a sparse,
low-diversity herbaceous layer and a hummocky carpet of sphagnum moss
(NatureServe 2006, Glaser et al. 1981, Verry 1975, Vitt and Slack 1975,
Curtis 1959, Gates 1942). The harsh growing conditions of poor conifer
swamps (high acidity, low nutrient availability and saturated peat)
results in a unique but depauperate flora; relatively few species have
evolved the necessary adaptations to survive ombrotrophic conditions
(Mitsch and Gosselink 2000, Glaser 1992, Siegel 1988). Poor conifer
swamps are characterized by an exceptionally distinct plant community
with similarity throughout its range (Curtis 1959). Sphagnum species
form nearly continuous carpets consisting of low hummocks and extensive
lawns; other characteristic species include Maianthemum trifolium (false
mayflower), Sarracenia purpurea (pitcher-plant), Cypripedium acaule
(pink lady-slipper), Gaultheria hispidula (creeping snowberry),
Vaccinium oxycoccos (small cranberry), Trientalis borealis (starflower),
Melampyrum lineare (cow-wheat), Coptis trifolia (goldthread), Carex
trisperma (sedge), C. magellanica (sedge), C. oligosperma (sedge),
Eriophorum vaginatum (tawny cotton-grass), E. vaginatum (cotton-grass),
Rhododendron groenlandicum (Labrador-tea), Chamaedaphne calyculata
(leatherleaf), Kalmia polifolia (bog-laurel), Vaccinium angustifolium
(low sweet blueberry), V. myrtilloides (Canada blueberry), Aronia
prunifolia (chokeberry), Picea mariana (black spruce), Larix laricina
(tamarack), Pinus banksiana (jack pine), P. resinosa (red pine), and P.
strobus (white pine) (Epstein et al. 2002; MDNR 2003; Cohen 2006; Cohen
et al. 2015). Indicators of groundwater influence include Thuja
occidentalis (northern white-cedar), Alnus incana (tag alder), Betula
pumila (bog birch), Ilex verticillata (Michigan holly), Viburnum
cassinoides (wild-raisin), Osmunda regalis (royal fern), and Iris
versicolor (wild blue flag) (MNFI 2016).

Muskegs are characterized by low ericaceous, evergreen shrubs, a
low-diversity herbaceous layer dominated by sedges and a hummocky carpet
of sphagnum moss, and widely scattered or clumped, stunted conifers
(NatureServe 2006, Glaser et al. 1991, Verry 1975, Vitt and Slack 1975,
Curtis 1959, Gates 1942). Floristically, muskegs are relatively
homogenous and of limited plant diversity, exhibiting remarkably uniform
structure and composition across their wide range (Riley 1989, Curtis
1959). Minerotrophic indicator species are absent or present locally
near upland margins (including margins of sand ridges) and drainages
(MNFI 2016). A carpet of sphagnum is usually present, although
Pleurozium schreberi is often very abundant and forms large mats
covering drier mounds in shaded sites. Species composition is very
similar to that of poor conifer swamps, but open-site species such as
Andromeda glaucophylla (bog-rosemary), pitcher-plant, Drosera spp.
(sundews), Eriophorum spp. (cotton-grasses), Carex pauciflora (sedge),
Rhynchospora alba (white beak-rush), and Oclemena nemoralis (bog aster)
may be more prevalent (MDNR 2003; Cohen et al. 2015).

Open bogs are characterized by a continuous carpet of sphagnum moss, a
low-diversity herbaceous layer, low ericaceous, evergreen shrubs and
widely scattered and stunted conifer trees (NatureServe 2005a, Glaser et
al. 1991, Verry 1975, Vitt and Slack 1975, Curtis 1959, Gates 1942).
Floristically, open bogs are often homogenous and of limited diversity,
exhibiting remarkably uniform structure and composition across their
wide range (Riley 1989, Curtis 1959). However, unlike muskegs, bogs
often exhibit concentric zonation, with older portions of the bog mat at
the margins of the kettle dominated by trees and shrubs, and younger
portions dominated by herbaceous species and sphagnum mosses, sometimes
bordering an open water zone or "eye" (MNFI 2016). The harsh growing
conditions of bogs (high acidity, low nutrient availability and
saturated peat) results in a unique but depauperate flora: relatively
few species have evolved the necessary adaptations to cope with
ombrotrophic conditions (Mitsch and Gosselink 2000, Glaser 1992, Siegel
1988). Characteristic species of treed and shrub-dominated zones are the
same as those listed above for poor conifer swamp and muskeg. Unlike the
latter communities, bogs may also support a floating sphagnum mat with
white beak-rush, Drosera intermedia (spatulate-leaved sundew),
pitcher-plant, Vaccinium macrocarpon (large cranberry), Menyanthes
trifoliata (bog buckbean), Utricularia cornuta (horned bladderwort),
Xyris montana (yellow-eyed-grass), Calopogon tuberosus (grass-pink),
Pogonia ophioglossoides (rose pogonia), Carex limosa (bog lantern
sedge), and Lycopodiella inundata (bog clubmoss) (Cohen et al. 2015;
MNFI 2016).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  PIMA         *Picea mariana*                  Black spruce

  LALA         *Larix laricina*                 Tamarack

  LEGR         *Ledum groenlandicum*            Bog labrador tea

  ANPOG        *Andromeda glaucophylla*         Bog rosemary

  CHCA2        *Chamaedaphne calyculata*        Leatherleaf

  CATR10       *Carex trisperma*                Three seeded sedge

  CAOL3        *Carex oligosperma*              Fewseed sedge

  SPAF70       *Sphagnum affine*                Sphagnum
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Succession within peatland systems is not unidirectional but stochastic,
with rates and pathways of succession determined by a complex array of
interacting biotic and abiotic factors (Klinger 1996, Jasieniuk and
Johnson 1982). Bogs can succeed to poor conifer swamp or remain as bogs
depending on the site's hydrology (lowered water tables and grounding
and compaction of peat will allow for the establishment of trees),
disturbance regime (fire and flooding will keep open systems open), and
species composition (a seed source of conifer trees in the vicinity is
required and some ericaceous species can limit seedling establishment
and tree growth). Where poor conifer swamp is invading an open bog, the
youngest trees are found closest to the bog while the oldest trees are
farthest from the bog (Klinger 1996).

Once established, poor conifer swamp can persist for hundreds of years
given stable hydraulic conditions and the absence of fire. Poor conifer
swamps and muskegs can be even-aged or uneven-aged depending on the
disturbance history and age of a site. Younger stands, regenerated
following fire tend to be even-aged with tall dense canopies, while
older stands tend to be uneven-aged with more open canopies and variable
heights (Groot 2002, Harper et al. 2002, Groot and Horton 1994, Morin
and Gagnon 1991, Taylor et al. 1988, Barnes and Wagner 1981, Curtis
1959). Within even-aged stands, stratification of species into distinct
size classes is common. This structural feature occurs because one
species (e.g., black spruce) obtains a disproportionate share of the
finite resources at the expense of the other species (e.g., tamarack or
balsam fir) (Newton and Smith 1988). Within dense, stands of even-aged
black spruce, density dependent mortality or self-thinning typically
occurs after several decades (Carleton and Wannamaker 1987). As poor
conifer swamps and muskegs age, they tend to become more complex
structurally but with relatively stable tree species composition. The
structural diversity of old-growth poor conifer swamps (200-300yrs old)
provides important habitat for regional biodiversity. Small scale
disturbance factors, such as windthrow events and insect herbivory
(e.g., spruce budworm), generate numerous snags, coarse woody debris,
and gaps within the canopy. These canopy gaps are captured primarily by
black spruce layering but also by swamp conifer seedlings. Compared to
trees established from seed, layers tend to be of shorter stature. As
stands age, they become more open with discontinuous canopies. In
addition to structural complexity, epiphytic diversity tends to increase
with stand age since older trees are available for a longer period of
time for epiphytic colonization, vegetative expansion, and sexual
reproduction (Harper et al. 2005, Ruel et al. 2004, Harper et al. 2003,
Harper et al. 2002, Groot 2002, Groot and Horton 1994, Bergeron and
Dubuc 1989). Old-growth, uneven-aged poor conifer swamps are most
prevalent in fire resistant landscapes and in extensive areas of
peatland forest, which have reduced fire frequencies (Groot 2002).

Fire, which is an infrequent but important disturbance factor within
poor conifer swamps and muskegs, controls tree population dynamics by
initiating and terminating succession (Cleland et al. 2004, Miller and
Futyma 1987, Futyma and Miller 1986, Whitney 1986, Foster 1985, Payette
and Gagnon 1979, Curtis 1959). The primary ignition source for fires
within poor conifer swamps and muskegs is summer lightning strike
(Foster 1985, Rowe 1973), however, historically fires started by Native
Americans in surrounding uplands (Chapman 1984, Day 1953) likely spread
to some swamp forests. Estimates of fire return intervals for forested
peatlands range widely from just over a hundred years (superficial
fires) to several hundred years in fire-prone landscapes to several
hundred to over a thousand years in swamps in fire-protected landscapes
(Cleland et al. 2004, MNDNR 2003; Whitney 1986). Fire rotation period
typically increases from south to north and with increasing organic soil
moisture (Sirois and Payette 1989). The accumulation of thick organic
soils often prolongs the fire cycle within these systems (Foster 1985).
In addition, forest floor thickness, which increases with time since
fire, is negatively correlated with fire severity (Fenton et al. 2005,
Ruel et al. 2004). Fire frequency can also be reduced by fire breaks
such as bodies of water and deciduous forests (Rowe 1973). Catastrophic
fires can convert shrub- and tree-dominated muskeg to Carex oligosperma
lawns (MNDNR 2003); such sites are prevalent on sand plains within and
adjacent to the HNF (MNFI 2016). Carex oligosperma lawns provide a fuel
source that may increase fire return intervals in affected systems.

Fire severity and frequency in poor conifer swamps and muskegs is
closely related to climatic change and fluctuations in water level.
Prolonged periods of drought and lowered water table can allow the
surface peat to dry out enough to burn (Schwintzer and Williams 1974,
Vogl 1964). When the surface peat burns, the fire releases organic
matter from the peat, stimulates decay, slows peat accumulation and
exposes mineral soil (Jean and Bouchard 1991, Damman 1990, Rowe 1973,
Vogl 1964). Fires within poor conifer swamps and muskegs are typically
stand-replacing crown fires that kill the majority of canopy trees
(Harper et al. 2002, Knowles 1991a, Bergeron and Dubuc 1989, Curtis
1959). Depending on its severity, fire can eliminate or reduce the soil
organic layer (Fenton et al. 2005, Harper et al. 2005, Ruel et al.
2004). Fires in poor conifer swamps and muskegs generate a flush of
growth, first in ground layer taxa and ericaceous shrubs, and then in
coniferous trees. Increased growth, seed and fruit production, and
flowering results from increases in light availability, soil
temperature, decomposition rates and nutrient availability (Ruel et al.
2004, Larsen and MacDonald 1998,Foster 1985, Barnes and Wagner 1981,
Rowe 1973).

Exposure of the mineral soil provides a suitable medium for the
establishment and germination of swamp conifers (i.e., black spruce,
tamarack, jack pine and northern white cedar) (Brown et al. 1988, Barnes
and Wagner 1981, Curtis 1959). Species present in abundance before the
fire are typically at an advantage for extending their distributions
afterward (Rowe 1973). Cone serotiny provides black spruce and jack pine
a competitive advantage in terms of seeding onto burned sites in that
fire-killed trees can provide seed. Tamarack, white pine, cedar and
balsam fir must rely on wind or animal dispersal from seed trees that
survived the fire or occur in neighboring, unburned stands (Knowles
1991a). The majority of seedlings typically establish within the first
couple of years following the fire (Rajora and Pluhar 2003, St-Piere and
Gagnon 1992, Morin and Gagnon 1991) but recruitment at a lessened rate
often continues for several decades following the disturbance and
initial pulse of seedlings (Larsen and MacDonald 1998, Groot and Horton
1994, Sirois and Payette 1989). The initially established trees often
serve as an internal seed source. The rate of reforestation following
fire is dependent on the size and severity of the burn; centers of large
burns are especially slow to restock (Foster 1985). Swamps in which the
organic layer burns evenly tend to support rapid seedling establishment
and become even-aged (Foster 1985); these stands can even be
monospecific (typically dominated by black spruce or tamarack) if the
diversity of seed source is limited (Bergeron and Dubuc 1989). Seed
source availability and seedbed availability and quality determine the
burned stand's tree density as well as composition (Sirois and Payette
1989). Fires of weak severity leave much of the organic layer intact,
which can result in slow and irregular recruitment because of the
limited availability of mineral soil seedbed (Fenton et al. 2005, Harper
et al. 2005, Foster 1985) and may facilitate the conversion of poor
conifer swamp to muskeg (Vogl 1964). In fire prone landscapes, periodic
fire can also maintain open peatlands: conversely, fire suppression in
these areas can lead to the conversion of open bogs to poor conifer
swamps (Vitt and Slack 1975, Curtis 1959).

Fires typically cause change in species abundance but not in species
composition. In contrast, water regime and nutrient regime changes
result in drastic modification of species composition and abundance
(Jasieniuk and Johnson 1982). Beaver, through their dam-building
activities, can instigate substantial hydrologic change to peatland
systems, either causing flooding or the lowering of the water table of
poor conifer swamps and muskegs depending on the location of the forest
in relation to the dam (Futyma and Miller 1986, Jeglum 1975, Heinselman
1963, Curtis 1959, Gates 1942). Behind a beaver dam the water table is
higher while below it, drier conditions are generated (Jeglum 1975).
Short periods of flooding can cause needle chlorosis, necrotic needle
tips, and decreased shoot and root growth of swamp conifers due to low
oxygen concentration and nutrient availability in the rooting medium
from water logging (Islam and MacDonald 2004, Islam et al. 2003).
Prolonged flooding of poor conifer swamps and muskegs can result in the
death of canopy trees and the conversion of forested peatlands to bogs
or even open systems dominated by marsh and fen vegetation (Asada et al.
2005). Flooding can also cause grounded peat mats to become loosened
from the bottom and float ( Asada et al. 2005, Gates 1942). Flooding
induced tree mortality is greater on grounded peat mats compared to free
floating mats: free mats float up with a rising water table while
grounded mats become inundated and have shallower aerobic zones (Asada
et al. 2005, Schwintzer 1979, Schwintzer 1978a, Schwintzer 1973). Roots
of peatland trees are physiologically active near the surface and are
quickly killed when the water table rises following flooding (Glaser and
Janssens 1986). Flooding typically causes tree mortality after about a
decade but different tree species have different tolerances for flooding
(Asada et al. 2005, Janssen 1967). Tamarack, which is often most
prevalent on wet sites, exhibits greater flooding tolerance than black
spruce. In response to prolonged soil flooding, tamarack produces
adventitious roots which increase root hydraulic conductivity or the
capacity to regulate water flow (Islam and MacDonald 2004, Islam et al.
2003). However, tamarack can also be more deleteriously affected by
flooding than black spruce since it is often restricted to hollows while
black spruce is elevated on hummocks (Denyer and Riley 1964).

The lowering of the water table through beaver damming or climatic
changes can also dramatically affect the species composition and
successional trajectory of poor conifer swamps and muskegs. Lowering of
a forested peatland's water table results in increased soil aeration,
soil temperature, decomposition, nutrient availability, and consequently
tree growth ( Pepin et al. 2002, MacDonald and Yin 1999, Liefers and
MacDonald 1990, Liefers and Rothwell 1987, Liefers and Rothwell 1986,
Jasieniuk and Johnson 1982). Increased tree growth following lowering of
the water table is especially prevalent in species such as tamarack,
which often establishes in wet microsites (i.e., hollows). Species such
as black spruce, which are often more prevalent on hummocks, may be
detrimentally impacted by lengthy periods of drying because of water
stress. Lowered water tables can dramatically reduce the micro-scale
heterogeneity that characterizes peatlands by eliminating the fine-scale
gradients in pH, moisture, and nutrient availability associated with
hummocks and hollows (MacDonald and Yin 1999). In addition, a low water
table for a prolonged period of time can cause the decomposition of the
organic layer (Curtis 1959) and the conversion of poor conifer swamp to
a more minerotrophic forest type. Lowering of the water table in open
peatland systems can lead to the conversion to shrub swamp or poor
conifer swamp (Gignac et al. 2000).

The natural disturbance regime in poor conifer swamps and muskegs is
also influenced by wind. Trees growing in poor conifer swamp are
particularly susceptible to windthrow because saturated sphagnum peat
provides a poor substrate for anchoring trees (Harper et al. 2002, Burns
1906). As noted above, the living roots of woody peatland plants occur
in a shallow rooting zone, generally restricted to the uppermost 15 cm
where there is sufficient oxygen to maintain aerobic respiration (Hamel
et al. 2004). The poor drainage of poor conifer swamps and muskegs and
the superficial rooting of swamp trees results in numerous windthrows
(Harper et al. 2003, Harper et al. 2002, Barnes and Wagner 1981, Curtis
1959, Dansereau and Segadas-Vianna 1952). Most windthrow only partially
disturbs a stand, creating small canopy gaps but complete canopy
destruction can also occur (Harper et al. 2002, Groot and Horton 1994).
Catastrophic, stand-leveling blowdowns are infrequent disturbance
factors in poor conifer swamps and muskegs, with return intervals likely
greater than 1000yrs. As noted above, small-scale wind disturbance,
along with insect herbivory, contribute to the structural diversity of
poor conifer swamps and muskegs. Small-scale wind disturbance, along
with insect herbivory contribute to the structural diversity of muskegs
by generating moderate pit and mound topography, standing snags, and
woody debris, which is quickly enveloped by the sphagnum.

Poor conifer swamps, which often contain dense monospecific stands, are
inherently susceptible to epizootic attacks of insects and parasites.
The plant parasite Arceuthobium pusillum (dwarf mistletoe) can increase
the mortality of black spruce (Barnes and Wagner 1981, Gates 1942,
Coburn et al. 1933). Two insect defoliators are most prevalent in
peatlands, Pristiphora erichsonii (larch sawfly), and Choristoneura
fumiferana (spruce budworm) (Newton and Jolliffe 1998, Barnes and Wagner
1981, Curtis 1959). Spruce budworm defoliates both black spruce and
balsam fir but tends to be more detrimental to the later. The principal
effect of spruce budworm outbreaks on black spruce stands is the
increase in competitive asymmetry with smaller conspecifics suffering
from greater competition-induced mortality post-defoliation (Newton and
Jolliffe 1998). Tamarack growing in poor conifer swamps often suffers
from repeated defoliation by larch sawfly (Girardin et al. 2005, Tilton
1977). The life of a given tamarack is typically characterized by a
series of defoliation episodes, most of which are short in duration and
of moderate intensity (Graham 1956). However, prolonged larch sawfly
attacks can lead to extensive mortality of tamarack. Larch sawfly
outbreaks tend to be more severe on better drained sites; hydric sites
have defoliation episodes of lower intensity and duration due to the
severe restrictions on sawfly development and survival imposed by a high
water table (Girardin et al. 2005). Although a more recent arrival in
Michigan, the larch casebearer is beginning to cause heavy defoliation
to tamarack, especially in the eastern and central Upper Peninsula.

Native ericaceous shrubs can profoundly limit the establishment and
growth of swamp conifer trees through competitive inhibition and also
through the production of allelopathic compounds. Many of the ericaceous
plants that thrive in poor conifer swamps are fire-adapted and often
resprout vigorously and grow densely following fire or clear cuts
(Wheeler et al. 1983). Rapid and prolific resurgence of ericads, which
resprout or sucker from underground organs, can directly limit tree
seedling establishment and growth (Yamasaki et al. 1998, Zhu and Mallik
1994, Foster 1985). Sheep-laurel has been found to produce allelopathic
compounds that inhibit the growth and development of black spruce. These
water soluble and heat stable substances hinder the primary root
development of black spruce and are also believed to negatively impact
the ecotomycorrhizal fungi associated with black spruce (Yamasaki et al.
1998, Zhu and Mallik 1994, Thompson and Mallik 1989, Peterson 1965). The
negative effects of sheep-laurel on black spruce root growth are most
pronounced under acidic conditions (Zhu and Mallik 1994).

Poor fens and bogs can succeed to poor conifer swamp or northern shrub
thicket. Lowering of the water table of fens and bogs results in the
increase in decomposition rates of organic matter and the subsequent
accumulation of compact peat that is more conducive to shrub and tree
growth (Gignac et al. 2000, Almendinger and Leete 1998, Riley 1989,
Schwintzer 1981, Miller 1981, Schwintzer and Williams 1974). Conversions
of bog to fen can also occur, however with far less frequency (Glaser et
al. 1990). A discharge of alkaline groundwater at the peat surface of a
bog, caused by a change in hydraulic head, can result in the conversion
of bog vegetation to fen vegetation (Glaser et al. 1990, Siegel and
Glaser 1987). Mixing of as little as 10% groundwater from underlying
calcareous parent material with acid bog water is sufficient to raise
the peatland pH from 3.6 to 6.8 (Glaser et al. 1990). Fens and bogs are
very sensitive to changes in pH and subsequent availability of
nutrients: fen vegetation can replace bog flora when pH increases above
4.5 (Siegel 1988).

As noted above, flooding can result in the conversion of fens to bogs.
Flooding can also contribute to fen maintenance. Roots of peatland trees
are physiologically active near the surface and are quickly killed when
the water table rises following flooding (Glaser and Janssens 1986).
Option 1 is a permanent to semi-permanent increase in water levels.
Option 2 is a permanent to semi-permanent decrease in water levels.

Flooding may also push this BpS to another BpS entirely.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

This BpS can range from thousands of acres to less than five acres in
size. The larger delineations typically occur in central to northern MN,
the eastern Upper Peninsula of MI, and the smaller and scattered
delineations in the western Upper Peninsula, northern Lower Peninsula
and northern WI. These areas have a relatively low alpha diversity, but
can vary considerably in beta diversity even within the same
delineation. They may also contain scattered, better-drained islands
with mineral soils and hardwoods in the larger delineations.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Reviewer removed descriptions of wet meadow, shrub-carr, and poor fen,
which fit better with other alliances. Hydrologic disruption, especially
in the form of beaver flooding of isolated depressions, where damming
can significantly increase water levels, may result in the conversion of
this BpS to a variety of other NVC groups, including Eastern North
American Freshwater Marsh Group; Eastern North American Shrub Swamp
Group; and Eastern North American Boreal Freshwater Marsh, Wet Meadow, &
Shrubland Group, or BpS Laurentian-Acadian Shrub-Herbaceous Wetland
Systems.

Within National Vegetation Classification System: Eastern North American
Boreal Acidic Bog & Fen Group (Faber-Langendoen & Gawler 2015). The
revision of the NVC and development of new hierarchical classes is
potentially problematic for the current BpS descriptions that are often
based on the old, now replaced Ecological Systems. It would be good to
review the BpS types to crosswalk them to the appropriate levels in the
NVC.

Other classifications: Michigan Natural Features Inventory (MNFI)
Natural Community Classification: Poor Conifer Swamp; Muskeg; Bog (Cohen
et al. 2015). Wisconsin Natural Heritage Inventory: Black Spruce Swamp;
Bog Relict; Muskeg; Open Bog (Epstein et al. 2002). Minnesota County
Biological Survey, Ecological Land Classification Program, and Natural
Heritage and Nongame Research Program: Northern Spruce Bog; Northern
Poor Conifer Swamp; Northern Open Bog (Aaseng et al. 2011).
International Vegetation Classification (IVC): Alliance: Picea mariana -
Larix laricina / Sphagnum spp. Poor - Intermediate Swamp Alliance; Picea
mariana / Sphagnum spp. Eastern Boreal Bog Woodland Alliance;
Chamaedaphne calyculata / Carex lasiocarpa Sub-Boreal Acidic Bog & Fen
Group; Chamaedaphne calyculata - Kalmia polifolia / Carex oligosperma
Acidic Shrub Bog & Fen Alliance. Associations: Picea mariana - (Larix
laricina) / Ledum groenlandicum / Sphagnum spp. Forest; Picea mariana /
Ledum groenlandicum / Carex trisperma / Sphagnum spp. Bog Woodland;
Pinus banksiana - (Picea mariana) - Mixed Hardwoods / Sphagnum spp.
Forest; Picea mariana / Chamaedaphne calyculata / Sphagnum spp. Open Bog
Woodland; Chamaedaphne calyculata - Ledum groenlandicum - Kalmia
polifolia Bog Dwarf-shrubland; Larix laricina / Chamaedaphne calyculata
/ Carex lasiocarpa Shrubland; Chamaedaphne calyculata / Carex
oligosperma - Eriophorum virginicum Dwarf-shrubland; Chamaedaphne
calyculata / Carex oligosperma / Sphagnum spp. Poor Fen Dwarf-shrubland.

Issues or Problems

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Reviewer noted that construction of road crossings, dams and other human
disturbances have led to altered beaver distributions and activity,
which has implications for bog formation.

Comments

Reviewer also submitted a simplified model that does not include
S-classes more typical of other BpS's. Open (muskeg) and closed (poor
conifer swamp) conditions can be long-seral and depend on
landform/surrounding landscape veg & fire frequency. Modeling water
increases or decreases may be too complicated/too regionally specific
for broad application. Due to classification implications we were not
able to implement suggestions during the 2018 BpS review.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 14 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**     **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- ------------------- -------------------
  SPIRA        Spiraea             Spirea              Low-Mid

  ALNUS        Alnus               Alder               Middle

  CALAM        Calamagrostis       Reedgrass           Lower

  CALA16       Carex lacustris     Hairy sedge         Lower
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Wet meadow/shrub carr are open wetlands dominated by dense cover of
broad-leaved graminoids or tall shrubs. Present on mineral to sapric
peat soils in basins or along streams. Moss cover is often less than
five percent, but can range to \>75%. Brown mosses are usually dominant,
but sphagnum can be dominant on some sites. Characteristic species
include Calamagrostis canadensis, Carex lacustris, Carex stricta,
Lysimachia thyrsiflora, Spiraea alba, Alnus incana, American elm and
black ash. Sphagnum covers can quickly invade the wet meadow/shrub carr
when water levels stabilize. The chemistry of these sites can be quickly
converted by sphagnum to poor fen conditions before characteristic wet
meadow species have been replaced by plants of poor fens. The process of
succession of wet meadow/shrub carr to poor fen can be reversed by
return of higher or more variable water level.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. The shrub/herb/moss
lifeform may be dominant. Canopy closure is 0%. Min height is 0m, max
height is 1.1m. The shrub lifeform may also be dominant. Canopy closure
min is 50%, max 100%. Min height is 0.6m, max height is 3.1m.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 16 Mid Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**  **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ -------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  SPHAG2       Sphagnum             Sphagnum            Lower

  CALA11       Carex lasiocarpa     Woollyfruit sedge   Lower

  CAOL3        Carex oligosperma    Fewseed sedge       Upper

  BEPU4        Betula pumila        Bog birch           Low-Mid
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Poor fens are open sphagnum peatlands with variable development of
hummocks and hollows. Dominated either by fined-leaved sedges or low
shrubs. Present in small basins, on floating mats near lakes and ponds,
and in large peatlands on glacial lake plains. Species diversity is low,
but minerotrophic species such as Betula pumila, Carex lasiocarpa,
Menyanthes trifoliate, Potentilla palustris and Salix pedicellaris help
distinguish poor fens from bogs. Poor fens occur in peatlands where the
peat surface is nearly isolated from mineral-rich runoff and is becoming
increasingly acidic (pH is 4.2-5.5). Poor fens can develop through the
acidification of wet meadows. This can occur in basins and on floating
mats where invasion and accumulation of Sphagnum elevates the surface
peat, isolating plant roots from underlying minerotrophic water.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. The herb/moss
lifeform or the shrub lifeform are the dominant lifeform. Moss cover is
nearly always 100%. Herbs are abundant, with graminoids often being the
dominant vegetation. Low shrubs are the dominant species on many sites
and can have \>50% cover.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class C 38 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**    **Scientific Name** **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------- ------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  LARIX         Larix               Larch              Mid-Upper

  PIMA          Picea mariana       Black spruce       Mid-Upper

  CHAMA5        Chamaedaphne        Leatherleaf        Low-Mid

  SPHAG2        Sphagnum            Sphagnum           Lower
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Poor conifer swamps are conifer-dominated peatlands with sparse canopy
of stunted trees. Understory is depauperate and dominated by ericaceous
shrubs, fine-leaved graminoids, and low hummocks of Sphagnum moss. Tree
canopy cover is usually 25-50%. Surface water pH is usually \>4.1.
Species diversity is low, but minerotrophic indicators are typical.
Sphagnum species form nearly continuous carpets consisting of low
hummocks and extensive lawns; other characteristic species include
Smilacina trifolia, Sarracenia purpurea, Carex trisperma, Eriophorum
vaginatum, Ledum groenlandicum, Chamaedaphne calyculata, Alnus incana,
black spruce and tamarack. In general, poor conifer swamps develop in
peatlands where the peat surface is becoming isolated from mineral-rich
groundwater because of buildup of peat and invasion by sphagnum. They
may also develop from poor fens where the formation of sphagnum hummocks
creates sufficiently aerated condition for the establishment and growth
of black spruce and tamarack. Catastrophic fires in poor conifer swamps
are not common. An analysis of the Public Land Survey (PLS) records in
MN indicates that the historic rotation for catastrophic fires was about
570yrs. Moderate surface fires and light windthrow were somewhat more
common disturbances in poor conifer swamps, occurring about every 90yrs.
There is little direct evidence that windthrow has a significant impact
on poor conifer swamps. The PLS records in MN suggest the historic
rotation of catastrophic windthrow was about 500yrs.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class D 23 Late Development 2 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------- -----------------
  PIMA         Picea mariana          Black spruce        Upper

  LEGR         Ledum groenlandicum    Bog labrador tea    Low-Mid

  CATR10       Carex trisperma        Threeseeded sedge   Lower

  SPHAG2       Sphagnum               Sphagnum            Lower
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Muskegs are black spruce dominated peatlands on deep peat. Canopy is
often sparse (25-75% cover), with stunted trees. Understory is dominated
by ericaceous shrubs and fine-leaved graminoids on high sphagnum
hummocks. Minerotrophic indicator species are absent or present only as
single individuals or single clones. A carpet of sphagnum is usually
present, although Pleurozium schreberi is often very abundant and forms
large mats covering drier mounds in shaded sites. Other characteristic
species include Carex trisperma, Eriophorum vaginatum, Ledum
groendlandicum and black spruce. Muskegs occur where buildup of peat
causes the peat surface to become isolated from mineral-rich runoff or
subsurface flow so that all mineral inputs come from precipitation.
Although fires can occur in muskegs, they are not very common. An
analysis of the Public Land Survey (PLS) records in MN indicates that
the historic rotation of catastrophic fires was in excess of 1000yrs.
These fires can result in conversion of a muskeg to an open bog
community; if sufficient nutrients are released into surface waters by
burning of peat and vegetation, the bog may be converted to a poor fen.
Surface fires appear to have been more common, occurring about every
120yrs. There is little direct evidence that windthrow has a significant
impact on muskegs. The PLS records in MN suggest the historic rotation
of catastrophic windthrow was about 700yrs.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class E 9 Late Development 3 - Open

Indicator Species

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  SPHAG2       Sphagnum            Sphagnum           Lower

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Open bogs are sphagnum-dominated peatlands with microtoppgraphy ranging
from deep hollows and low sphagnum carpets to well-developed high
hummocks. Present in large patterned peatlands and in small basins in
nutrient-poor outwash plains and in areas of non-calcareous till
deposits in scoured bedrock terrain. Surface water pH is \<4.2 and
Minerotrophic indicator species are absent. Sphagnum cover is about 90%,
other mosses 10%; other characteristic species include Carex
oligosperma, Eriophorum vaginatum, Sarracenia purpurea, Chamaedaphne
calyculata, Kalmia polifolia, Vaccinium oxycoccos, Andromeda
glaucophylla and Ledum groenlandicum. Open bogs develop where the peat
surface becomes elevated, isolating it from mineral-rich runoff or
groundwater. The saturated conditions and rapid accumulation of sphagnum
peat prevent or inhibit establishment and growth of black spruce and
tamarack. Open bog can originate from transformation of muskeg after a
wind or fire event that eliminated tree canopy. Loss of the tree canopy
results in reduced evapotranspiration and increasingly water-logged
conditions, causing a shift toward greater presence of carpet forming
sphagnum species and the development of wet hollows. Ericaceous shrubs
and other xerophytic bog species are the predominant vegetation on the
remaining hummocks. Dominant lifeform is the herb/moss lifeform.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: Flooding

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Aaseng, N.E., Almendinger, J.C., Dana, R.P., Hanson, D.S., Lee, M.D.,
Rowe, E.R., Rusterholz, K.A. and D.S. Wovcha. 2011. Minnesota's native
plant community classification: A statewide classification of
terrestrial and wetland vegetation based on numerical analysis of plot
data. Biological Report No. 108. Minnesota County Biological Survey,
Ecological Land Classification Program, and Natural Heritage and Nongame
Research Program. St. Paul: Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.

Albert, D.A. 1995. Regional landscape ecosystems of Michigan, Minnesota,
and Wisconsin: A working map and classification. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-178.
St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment
Station. Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center Home Page.
http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/1998/rlandscp/rlandscp.htm. (Version
03JUN98.) 250 pp.

Albert, D.A., S.R. Denton and B.V. Barnes. 1986. Regional landscape
ecosystems of Michigan. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, School of
Natural Resources. 32 pp and map.

Almendinger, J.C., J.E. Almendinger and P.H. Glaser. 1986. Topographic
fluctuations across a spring fen and raised bog in the Lost River
Peatland, northern Minnesota. Journal of Ecology. 74(2): 393-401.

Almendinger, J.A. and J.H. Leete. 1998. Regional and local hydrogeology
of calcareous fens in the Minnesota River Basin, USA. Wetlands. 18(2):
184-202.

Amon, J.P., C.A. Thompson, Q.J. Carpenter and J. Mines. 2002. Temperate
zone fens of the glaciated Midwestern USA. Wetlands. 22(2): 301-317.

Asada, T., B.G. Warner and S.L. Schiff. 2005. Effects of shallow
flooding on vegetation and carbon pools in boreal peatlands. Applied
Vegetation Science. 8: 199-208.

Barnes, B.V. 1991. Deciduous forest of North America. In: Röhrig, E. and
B. Ulrich, eds. Temperate Deciduous Forests. Elsevier, Amsterdam:
219-344. 635 pp.

Barnes, B.V. and W.H. Wagner, Jr. 1981. Michigan Trees: A Guide to the
Trees of Michigan and the Great Lakes Region. University of Michigan
Press, Ann Arbor, MI. 383 pp.

Barnes, B.V., K.S. Pregitzer, T.A. Spies and V. H. Spooner. 1982.
Ecological forest site

classification. Journal of Forestry. 80(8): 493-498.

Bay, R.R. 1967. Ground water and vegetation in two peat bogs in northern
Minnesota. Ecology. 48(2): 308-310.

Beckwith, L.C. and A.T. Drooz. 1956. Tamarack mortality in Minnesota due
to larch

sawfly outbreak. Journal of Forestry. 54: 268-269.

Bedford, B.L. and K.S. Godwin. 2003. Fens of the United States:
Distribution, characteristics, and scientific connection versus legal
isolation. Wetlands. 23(3): 608-629.

Bedford, B.L., M.R. Walbridge and A. Aldous. 1999. Patterns in nutrient
availability and plant diversity of temperate North American wetlands.
Ecology. 80(7): 2151-2169.

Bergeron, Y. and M. Dubuc. 1989. Succession in the southern part of the
Canadian boreal forest. Vegetation. 79: 51-63.

Bergeron, Y., B. Harvey, A. Leduc and S. Gaulthier. 1999. Forest
management guidelines based on natural disturbance dynamics: Stand- and
forest-level considerations. Forestry Chronicle. 75(1): 49-54.

Bisbee, K.E., S.T. Gower, J.M. Norman and E.V. Nordheim. 2001.
Environmental controls on ground cover species composition and
productivity in a boreal black spruce forest. Oecologia. 129: 261-270.

Boelter, D.H. and E.S. Verry. 1977. Peatland and water in the northern
Lake States. USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment
Station. General Technical Report NC-31. 26 pp.

Brais, S., P. David and R. Ouimet. 2000. Impacts of wild fire severity
and salvage harvesting on the nutrient balance of jack pine and black
spruce boreal stands. Forest Ecology and Management. 137: 231-243.

Braun, E.L. 1950. Deciduous forests of eastern North America. Hafner
Press, New York, NY. 596 pp.

Bridgham, S.D., J. Pastor, J.A. Janssens, C. Chapin and T.J. Malterer.
1996. Multiple limiting gradients in peatlands: A call for a new
paradigm. Wetlands. 16(1): 45-65.

Brinson, M.M. 1993. Changes in the functioning of wetlands along
environmental gradients. Wetlands. 13(2): 65-74.

Brown, K.R., D.B. Zobel and J.C. Zasada. 1988. Seed dispersal, seedling
emergence, and early survival of Larix laricina in the Tanana Valley,
Alaska. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 18: 306-314.

Bubier, J.L. 1991. Patterns of Picea mariana (black spruce) growth and
raised bog development in Victory Basin, Vermont. Bulletin of the Torrey
Botanical Club. 118(4): 399-411.

Burns, G.P. 1906. Bog studies. Field Studies in Botany. University
Bulletin, New Series, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor: 7(14): 3-13.

Carleton, T.J. and B.A. Wannamaker. 1987. Mortality and self-thinning in
postfire black spruce. Annals of Botany. 59: 621-628.

Chapman, K.A. 1984. An ecological investigation of native grassland in
Southern Lower Michigan. MA thesis, Western Michigan University. 235 pp.

Chapman, S., A. Buttler, A.-J. Francez, F. Laggoun-Defarge, H. Vasander,
M. Schloter, J. Combe, P. Grosvernier, H. Harms, D. Epron, D. Gilbert
and E. Mitchell. 2003. Exploitation of northern peatlands and
biodiversity maintenance: A conflict between economy and ecology.
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 1(10): 525-532.

Cheliak, W.M., J. Wang and J.A. Pitel. 1988. Population structure and
genetic diversity in tamarack, Larix laricina. Canadian Journal of
Forest Research. 18: 1318-1324.

Cleland, D.T., T.R. Crow, S.C. Saunders, D.I. Dickmann, A.L. Maclean,
J.K. Jordan, R.L. Watson, A.M. Sloan and K.D. Brosofske. 2004.
Characterizing historical and modern fire regimes in Michigan (USA): A
landscape ecosystem approach. Landscape Ecology. 19: 311-325.

Coburn, H., D. Dean and G.M. Grant. 1933. An ecological study of
Bryant's Bog, Cheboygan County. Michigan. Papers of the Michigan Academy
of Science, Arts, and Letters. 17: 57-65.

Cohen, J.G., M.A. Kost, B.S. Slaughter, and D.A. Albert. 2015. A field
guide to the natural communities of Michigan. Michigan State University
Press, East Lansing, MI. 362 pp.

Cohen, J.G. 2006. Natural community abstract for muskeg. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 20 pp.

Cohen, J.G. 2005. (Draft) Natural community abstract for bog. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 13 pp.

Cohen, J.G. 2005. (Draft) Natural community abstract for poor conifer
swamp. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 26 pp.

Cohen, J.G. 2005. (Draft) Natural community abstract for poor fen.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 14 pp.

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A. Corner and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan's
presettlement vegetation, as interpreted from the General Land Office
Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI.
Digital map.

Crossley, D.I. 1976. Growth response of spruce and fir to release and
suppression. The

Forestry Chronicle. 52: 189-193.

Crow, H.A. 1969. An ecological analysis of a southern Michigan bog.
Michigan Botanist. 8: 11-27.

Crum, H. 1983. Mosses of the Great Lakes Forest. University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI. 417 pp.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Damman, A.W.H. 1986. Hydrology, development, and biogeochemistry of
ombrogenous

peat bogs with special reference to nutrient relocation in a western
Newfoundland

bog. Canadian Journal of Botany. 64: 384-394.

Damman, A.W.H. 1978. Distribution and movement of elements in
ombrotrophic peat

bogs. Oikos. 30: 480-495.

Damman, A.W.H. 1988. Regulation of nitrogen removal in Sphagnum bogs and
other

peatlands. Oikos. 51: 291-305.

Damman, A.H. 1990. Nutrient status of ombrotrophic peat bogs. Aquilo
Series Botanica. 28: 5-14.

Dansereau, P. and F. Segadas-Vianna. 1952. Ecological study of the peat
bogs of eastern North America. I. Structure and evolution of vegetation.
Canadian Journal of Botany. 30: 490-520.

Day, G.M. 1953. The Indian as an ecological factor in the Northeastern
forest. Ecology. 34(2): 329-346.

Dean, D. and H. Coburn. 1927. An ecological study of Linne Bog,
Cheboygan County, Michigan with special reference to Nemopanthus
mucranata (L.) Trelease. Papers of the Michigan Academy of Science,
Arts, and Letters. 8: 87-96.

Denyer, W.B.G. and C.G. Riley. 1964. Dieback and mortality of tamarack
caused by high water. Forestry Chronicle. 40: 334- 338.

Eggers, S.D. and D.M. Reed. 1997. Wetland plants and plant communities
of Minnesota and Wisconsin. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, St Paul,
Minnesota. 263 pp.

Epstein, E.J., E.J. Judziewicz, and E.A. Spencer. 2002. Wisconsin
natural community abstracts. Department of Natural Resources, Bureau of
Natural Resources, Madison, WI.

Faber-Langendoen, D., ed. 2001. Plant communities of the Midwest:
Classification in an ecological context. Association for Biodiversity
Information, Arlington, VA. 61 pp & appendix (705 pp.).

Faber-Langendoen, D., and S.C. Gawler. 2015. Chamaedaphne calyculata -
Carex oligosperma - Kalmia polifolia Boreal Acidic Bog & Fen Group.
United States National Vegetation Classification. Federal Geographic
Data Committee, Washington, D.C. Accessed: 27 November 2016.

Fenton, N., N. Lecomte, S. Legare and Y. Bergeron. 2005. Paludification
in black spruce (Picea mariana) forests of eastern Canada: Potential
factors and management implication.

Forest Ecology and Management. 213: 151-159.

Fleming, R.L. and D.S. Mossa. 1996. Seed release from black spruce cones
in logging slash. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 26: 266-276.

Fitzgerald, S. and R.E. Bailey. 1975. Vegetational characteristics of a
circum-neutral bog, Barney's Lake, Beaver Island, Michigan. The Michigan
Academician. 7(4): 477-488.

Foster, D.R. 1985. Vegetation development following fire in Picea
mariana (black spruce)-Pleurozium forests of South-Eastern Labrador.
Canada Journal of Ecology. 73(2): 517-534.

Frelich, L.E. and C.G. Lorimer. 1991. Natural disturbance regimes in
hemlock-hardwood forests of the Upper Great Lakes region. Ecological
Monographs. 61(2): 145-164.

Futyma, R.P. and N.G. Miller. 1986. Stratigraphy and genesis of the Lake
Sixteen peatland, northern Michigan. Canadian Journal of Botany. 64:
3008-3019.

Gates, F.C. 1942. The bogs of northern Lower Michigan. Ecological
Monographs. 12(3): 213-254.

Gignac, L.D., L.A. Halsey and D.H. Vitt. 2000. A bioclimatic model for
the distribution of Sphagnum-dominated peatlands in North America under
present climatic conditions. Journal of Biogeography. 27(5): 1139-1151.

Girardin, M.P., E. Berglund, J.C. Tardiff and K. Monson. 2005. Radial
growth of tamarack (Larix laricina) in the Churchill Area, Manitoba,
Canada in relation to climate and larch sawfly (Pristiphora erichsonii)
herbivory. Artic, Antarctic, and Alpine Research. 37(2): 206-217.

Glaser, P.H. 1992. Raised bogs in eastern North America -- Regional
controls for species richness and floristic assemblages. Journal of
Ecology. 80: 535-554.

Glaser, P.H. and J.A. Janssens. 1986. Raised bogs in eastern North
America: Transitions in landforms and gross stratigraphy. Canadian
Journal of Botany. 64: 395-415.

Glaser, P.H., G.A. Wheeler, E. Gorham and H.E. Wright, Jr. 1981. The
patterned mires of the Red Lake Peatland, northern Minnesota:
Vegetation, water chemistry and landforms. Journal of Ecology. 69(2):
575-599.

Glaser, P.H., J.A. Janssens and D.I. Siegel. 1990. The response of
vegetation to chemical and hydrological gradients in the Lost River
Peatland, northern Minnesota. Journal of Ecology. 78(4): 1021-1048.

Gorham, E. and D.L. Tilton. 1978. The mineral content of Sphagnum fuscum
as affected by human settlement. Canadian Journal of Botany 56:
2755-2759.

Graham, S.A. 1956. The larch sawfly in the Lake States. Forest Science.
2(2): 132-160.

Grigal, D.F. 1990. Elemental dynamics in forested bogs in northern
Minnesota.

Canadian Journal of Botany 69: 539-546.

Groot, A. 2002. Is uneven-aged silviculture applicable to peatland black
spruce (Picea mariana) in Ontario, Canada. Forestry. 75(4): 437-442.

Groot, A. and B.J. Horton. 1994. Age and size structure of natural and
second-growth peatland Picea mariana stands. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research. 24: 225-233.

Halsey, L.A. and D.H. Vitt. 2000. Sphagnum-dominated peatlands in North
America since the last glacial maximum: Their occurrence and extent. The
Bryologist. 103(2): 334-352.

Hamel, B., N. Belanger and D. Pare. 2004. Productivity of black spruce
and jack pine stand in Quebec as related to climate, site biological
features and soil properties. Forest Ecology and Management. 191:
239-251.

Hammerson, G. 1994. Beaver (Castor canadensis): Ecosystem alterations,
management, and monitoring. Natural Areas Journal. 14(1): 44-57.

Harper, K.A., C. Boudreault, L. DeGrandpre, P. Drapeau, S. Gauthier and
Y. Bergeron. 2003. Structure, composition, and diversity of old-growth
black spruce boreal forest of the Clay Belt region in Quebec and
Ontario. Environmental Review. 11: 79-98.

Harper, K.A., Y. Bergeron, P. Drapeau, S. Gauthier and L. DeGrandpre.
2005. Structural development following fire in black spruce boreal
forest. Forest Ecology and Management. 206: 293-306.

Harper, K.A., Y. Bergeron, S. Gauthier and P. Drapeau. 2002. Post-fire
development of canopy structure and composition in black spruce forests
of Abitibi, Quebec: A landscape scale study. Silva Fennica. 36(1):
249-263.

Heinselman, M.L. 1963. Forest sites, bog processes, and peatland types
in the Glacial Lake Region, Minnesota. Ecological Monographs. 33(4):
327-374.

Heinselman, M.L. 1965. String bogs and other patterned organic terrain
near Seney, Upper Michigan. Ecology 46: 185-188.

Heinselman, M.L. 1970. Landscape evolution, peatland types, and the
environment in the Lake Agassiz Peatland Natural Area, Minnesota.
Ecological Monographs 40(2): 235-261.

Henry, R., B. Brooks and C. Davis. 1973. Population density of Larix
laricina in a sphagnum bog mat habitat. The Michigan Academician. 4:
529-535.

Islam, M.A. and S.E. MacDonald. 2004. Ecophysiological adaptations of
black spruce (Picea mariana) and tamarack (Larix laricina) seedlings to
flooding. Trees. 18: 35-42.

Islam, M.A., S.E. MacDonald and J.J. Zwiazek. 2003. Response of black
spruce (Picea

mariana) and tamarack (Larix laricina) to flooding and ethylene. Tree
Physiology. 23: 545-552.

Janssen, C.R. 1967. A floristic study of forests and bog vegetation,
Northwestern Minnesota. Ecology. 48(5): 751-765.

Janssen, C.R. 1968. Myrtle Lake: A late- and post-glacial pollen diagram
from northern Minnesota. Canadian Journal of Botany. 46: 1397-1408.

Jasieniuk, M.A. and E.A. Johnson. 1982. Peatland vegetation organization
and dynamics in western subartic, Northwest Territories, Canada.
Canadian Journal of Botany. 60: 2581-2593.

Jean, M. and A. Bouchard. 1991. Temporal changes in wetland landscapes
of a section of the St. Lawrence River, Canada. Environmental
Management. 15(2): 241-250.

Jeglum, J.K. 1971. Plant indicators of pH and water level in peatlands
at Candle Lake, Saskatchewan. Canadian Journal of Botany 49: 1661-1676.

Jeglum, J.K. 1974. Relative influence of moisture-aeration and nutrients
on vegetation and black spruce growth in Northern Ontario. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research 4: 114-126.

Jeglum, J.K. 1975. Vegetation-habitat changes caused by damming a
peatland drainageway in northern Ontario. Canadian Field-Naturalist.
89(4): 400-412.

Jeglum, J.K. and F. He. 1995. Pattern and vegetation -- environmental
relationships in a boreal forested wetland in northeastern Ontario.
Canadian Journal of Botany. 73: 629-637.

Karlin, E.F. and L.C. Bliss. 1984. Variation in substrate chemistry
along microtopographical and water-chemistry gradients in peatlands.
Canadian Journal of Botany. 62: 142-153.

Klinger, L.F. 1996. The myth of the classic hydrosere model of bog
succession. Artic and Alpine Research. 28 (1): 1-9.

Knowles, P. 1991a. Spatial genetic structure in two tamarack populations
with differing establishment histories. Evolution. 46(2): 572-576.

Knowles, P. 1991b. Spatial genetic structure within two natural stands
of black spruce. Silvae Genetica. 40 (1): 13-19.

Kost, M.A. 2001. Natural community abstract for relict conifer swamp.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 6 pp.

Lanini, W.T. and S.R. Radosevich. 1986. Response of three conifer
species to site preparation and shrub control. Forest Science 32(1):
61-77.

Larsen, C.P.S. and G.M. MacDonald. 1998. Fire and vegetation dynamics in
a jack pine and black spruce forest reconstructed using fossil pollen
and charcoal. Journal of Ecology. 86: 815-828.

Levan, M.A. and S.J. Riha. 1985. Response of root systems of northern
conifer transplants to flooding.

Liefers, V.J. and R.L. Rothwell. 1986. Effects of depth of water table
and substrate temperature on root and top growth of Picea mariana and
Larix laricina seedlings. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 16:
1201-1206.

Liefers, V.J. and R.L. Rothwell. 1987. Rooting of peatland black spruce
and tamarack in relation to depth of water table. Canadian Journal of
Botany. 65: 817-821.

Liefers, V.J. and S.E. MacDonald. 1990. Growth and foliar nutrient
status of black spruce and tamarack in relation to depth of water table
in some Alberta peatlands. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 20:
805-809.

Lindeman, R.L. 1941. The developmental history of Cedar Creek Bog,
Minnesota. American Midland Naturalist. 25(1): 101-112.

Locky, D.A., S.E. Bayley and D.H. Vitt. 2005. The vegetational ecology
of black spruce swamps, fens, and bogs in southern boreal Manitoba,
Canada. Wetlands. 25(3): 564-582.

MacDonald, S.E. and F. Yin. 1999. Factors influencing size inequality in
peatland black spruce and tamarack: Evidence from post-drainage release
growth. Journal of Ecology. 87: 404-412.

MacDonell, M.R. and A. Groot. 1997. Harvesting peatland black spruce:
Impacts on advance growth and site disturbance. The Forestry Chronicle.
73(2): 249-255.

McLaughlin, J.W., J.C. Lewin, D.D. Reed, C.C. Trettin, M.F. Jurgensen
and M.R. Gale. 1994. Soil factors related to dissolved organic carbon
concentrations in a black spruce swamp, Michigan. Soil Science. 158(6):
454-464.

Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 2000. IFMAP Southern Michigan
Land Cover (produced as part of the IFMAP natural resources decision
support system. Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Lansing, MI.
Digital dataset and report.

Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 2001a. IFMAP/GAP Lower
Peninsula Land Cover (produced as part of the IFMAP natural resources
decision support system.

Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Lansing, MI. Digital dataset
and report.

Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 2001b. IFMAP/GAP Upper
Peninsula Land Cover (produced as part of the IFMAP natural resources
decision support system. Michigan Department of Natural Resources,
Lansing, MI. Digital dataset and report.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory (MNFI). 2003. Draft description of
Michigan natural community types. (Unpublished manuscript revised March
4, 2003.) Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 36 pp.
http://www.msue.msu.edu/mnfi/lists/natural_community_types.pdf.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory (MNFI). 2016. Natural heritage
database. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI.

Miller, N. 1981. Bogs, bales, and BTU's: A primer on peat. Horticulture.
59: 38-45.

Miller, N.G. and R.P. Futyma. 1987. Paleohydrological implications of
Holocene

peatland development in northern Michigan. Quaternary Research. 27:
297-311.

Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 2003. Field guide to the
native plant communities of Minnesota: the Laurentian Mixed Forest
province. St. Paul, MN: Ecological Land Classification Program,
Minnesota County Biological Survey, and Natural Heritage and Nongame
Research Program. 352 pp.

MIRIS. 1978. MIRIS Landcover 1978. Michigan Department of Natural
Resources, Lansing, MI. Digital dataset.

Mitsch, W.J. and J.G. Gosselink. 2000. Wetlands. John Wiley and Sons
Inc, New York, NY. 920 pp.

Morgenstern, E.K. 1978. Range-wide genetic variation of black spruce.
Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 8: 463-473.

Morin, H. and R. Gagnon. 1991. Comparative growth and yield of layer-
and seed-origin black spruce (Picea mariana) stands in Quebec. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research. 22: 465-473.

NatureServe. 2006. NatureServe Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life
\[web application\]. Version 4.7. NatureServe, Arlington, VA. 20 April
2006 http://www.natureserve.org/explorer.

Newton, P.F. and P.A. Jolliffe. 1998. Temporal size-dependent growth
responses within density-stressed black spruce stands: Competition
processes and budworm effects. Forest Ecology and Management. 111: 1-13.

Newton, P.F. and V.G. Smith. 1988. Diameter distributional trends within
mixed black spruce/balsam fir and pure black spruce stand types. Forest
Ecology and Management. 25: 123-138.

Nicholson, J., L.D. Gignac and S.E. Bayley. 1996. Peatland distribution
along a north-

south transect in the Mackenzie River basin in relation to climate and
environmental

gradients. Vegetation. 126: 119-133.

O'Connell, K.E.B, S.T. Gower and J.M. Norman. 2003a. Comparison of net
primary production and light-use dynamics of two boreal black spruce
forest communities. Ecosystems. 6: 236-247.

O'Connell, K.E.B, S.T. Gower and J.M. Norman. 2003b. Net ecosystem
production of two contrasting boreal black spruce forest communities.
Ecosystems. 6: 248-260.

Osvald, H. 1935. A bog at Hartford, Michigan. Ecology. 16(3): 520-528.

Payette, S. and R. Gagnon. 1979. Tree-line dynamics in Ungava peninsula,
northern

Quebec. Holartic Ecology. 2: 239-248.

Pepin, S., A.P. Plamondon and A. Britel. 2002. Water relations of black
spruce trees on a peatland during wet years and dry years. Wetlands.
22(2): 225-233.

Peterson, E.B. 1965. Inhibition of black spruce primary roots by a
water-soluble

substance in Kalmia angustifolia. Forest Science. 11 (4): 473-479.

Pothier, D., R. Doucet and J. Boily. 1995. The effect of advance
regeneration height on future yield of black spruce stands. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research. 25: 536-544.

Prevost, M. 1997. Effects of scarification on seedbed coverage and
natural regeneration after a group seed-tree cutting in a black spruce
(Picea mariana) stand. Forest Ecology and Management. 94: 219-231.

Rajora, O.P. and S.A. Pluhar. 2003. Genetic diversity impacts of forest
fires, forest harvesting, and alternative reforestation practices in
black spruce (Picea mariana). Theoretical Applied Genetics. 106:
1203-1212.

Riley, J.L. 1989. Southern Ontario bogs and fens of the Canadian Shield.
Wetlands: Inertia or Momentum: 355-367.

Risenhoover, K.L. and S.A. Maass. 1987. The influence of moose on
composition and

structure of Isle Royale forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research.
17: 357-

364\.

Rowe, J.S. 1973. Fire in the boreal forest. Quaternary Research 3:
444-464.

Ruel, J.C., R. Horvath, C.H. Ung and A. Munson. 2004. Comparing height
growth and biomass production of black spruce trees in logged and burned
stands. Forest Ecology and Management. 193: 371-384.

Schwintzer, C.R. 1978a. Nutrient and water levels in a small Michigan
bog with high tree mortality. American Midland Naturalist. 100(2):
441-451.

Schwintzer, C.R. 1978b. Vegetation and nutrient status of northern
Michigan fens. Canadian Journal of Botany. 56: 3044-3051.

Schwintzer, C.R. 1979. Vegetation changes following a water level rise
and tree mortality in a Michigan bog. The Michigan Botanist. 18: 91-98.

Schwintzer, C.R. 1981. Vegetation and nutrient status of northern
Michigan bogs and conifer swamps with a comparison to fens. Canadian
Journal of Botany. 59: 842-853.

Schwintzer, C.R. and G. Williams. 1974. Vegetation changes in a small
Michigan bog from 1917 to 1972. American Midland Naturalist. 92(2):
447-459.

Schwintzer, C.R. and T.J. Tomberlin. 1982. Chemical and physical
characteristics of shallow ground waters in northern Michigan bogs,
fens, and swamp. American Journal of Botany. 69(8): 1231-1239.

Siegel, D.I. 1988. Evaluating cumulative effects of disturbance on the
hydrologic function of bogs, fens, and mires. Environmental Management.
12(5): 621-626.

Siegel, D.I. and P.H. Glaser. 1987. Groundwater flow in a bog-fen
complex, Lost River Peatland, northern Minnesota. Journal of Ecology.
75(3): 743-754.

Sirois, L. and S. Payette. 1989. Postfire black spruce establishment in
subarctic and boreal Quebec. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 19:
1571-1579.

Sjors, H. 1950. On the relation between vegetation and electrolytes in
north Swedish mire

water. Oikos. 2: 241-257.

Stanek, W. 1961. Natural layering of black spruce in northern Ontario.
Forestry Chronicle. 37: 245-258.

Stanek, W. 1968. Development of black spruce layers in Quebec and
Ontario. Forestry Chronicle. 44: 25-28.

St-Piere, H. et R. Gagnon. 1992. Regeneration après feu de l'epinette
noir (Picea mariana) et du pin gris (Pinus banksiana) dans la foret
boreale, Quebec. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 22: 474-481.

Swain, A.M. 1973. A history of fire and vegetation in northeastern
Minnesota as recorded in lake sediments. Quaternary Research. 3:
383-396.

Swanson, D.K. and D.F. Grigal. 1989. Vegetation indicators of organic
soil properties in Minnesota. Soil Science Society of America Journal.
53: 491-495.

Swinehart, A.L. and G.R. Parker. 2000. Palaeoecology and development of
peatlands in Indiana. American Midland Naturalist. 143(2): 267-297.

Taylor, S.J., T.J. Carleton and P. Adams. 1988. Understorey vegetation
change in a Picea mariana chronosequence. Vegetatio. 73(2): 63-72.

Thompson, I.D. and A.U. Mallik. 1989. Moose browsing and allelopathic
effects of Kalmia angustifolia on balsam fir regeneration in central
Newfoundland. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 19: 524-526.

Thompson, I.D., W.J. Curran, J.A. Hancock and C.E. Butler. 1992.
Influence of moose browsing on successional forest growth on black
spruce sites in Newfoundland. Forest Ecology and Management. 47: 29-37.

Tilton, D.L. 1977. Seasonal growth and foliar nutrients of Larix
laricina in three wetland

ecosystems. Canadian Journal of Botany. 55: 1292-1297.

Tyrell, L.E. and R.E.J. Boerner. 1986. Larix laricina and Picea mariana:
Relationships among leaf life-span, foliar nutrient patterns, nutrient
conservation, and growth efficiency. Canadian Journal of Botany. 65:
1570-1577.

Verry, E.S. 1975. Streamflow chemistry and nutrient yields from
upland-peatland watersheds in Minnesota. Ecology. 65(5): 1149-1157.

Vitt, D.H. and N.G. Slack. 1975. An analysis of the vegetation of
Sphagnum-dominated kettle-hole bogs in relation to environmental
gradients. Canadian Journal of Botany. 53: 332-359.

Vitt, D.H. and N.G. Slack. 1984. Niche Diversification of Sphagnum
relative to environmental factors in northern Minnesota peatlands.
Canadian Journal of Botany. 62: 1409-1430.

Vitt, D.H., H. Crum and J.A. Snider. 1975. The vertical zonation of
Sphagnum species in hummock-hollow complexes in northern Michigan. The
Michigan Botanist. 14(4): 190-200.

Vogl, R.J. 1964. The effects of fire on a muskeg in northern Wisconsin.
Journal of Wildlife Management. 28(2): 317-329.

Voss, E.G. 1972. Michigan Flora, Part 1. Cranbrook Inst. Sci. Bull. 55.
Bloomfield Hills, MI. 488 pp.

Voss, E.G. 1985. Michigan Flora Part II: Dicots (Sauruaceae-Cornaceae).
Bull. Cranbrook Inst. Sci. 59 and U of MI Herb. Xix + 724 pp.

Voss, E.G. 1996. Michigan Flora. Part III. Dicots
(Pyrolaceae-Compositae). Bull. Cranbrook Inst.Sci. 61 & Univ. of
Michigan Herbarium. Xix + 622 pp.

Wang, Z.M., M.J. Lechowicz and C. Potvin. 1994. Early selection of black
spruce seedlings and global change: Which genotypes should we favor?
Ecological Applications. 4(3): 604-616.

Wheeler, G.A., P.H. Glaser, E. Gorham, C.M. Wetmore, F.D. Bowers and
J.A. Janssens. 1983. Contributions to the flora of the Red Lake
Peatland, northern Minnesota, with special attention to Carex. American
Midland Naturalist. 110(1): 62-96.

Whitney, G.C. 1986. Relation of Michigan's presettlement pine forest to
substrate and

disturbance history. Ecology. 67(6): 1548-1559.

Yamasaki, S.H., J.W. Fyles, K.N. Egger and B.D. Titus. 1998. The effect
of Kalmia angustifolia on the growth, nutrition, and ectomycorrhizal
symbiont community of black spruce. Forest Ecology and Management. 105:
197-207.

Zhu, H. and A.U. Mallik. 1994. Interactions between Kalmia and black
spruce: isolation and identification of allelopathic compounds. Journal
of Chemical Ecology. 20(2): 407-421.

Zoltai, S.C. and D.H. Vitt. 1995. Canadian wetlands: Environmental
gradients and classification. Vegetatio. 118: 131-137
