# 14810 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Laurentian-Acadian Alkaline Conifer-Hardwood Swamp {#laurentian-acadian-alkaline-conifer-hardwood-swamp .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                             **Reviewers**   
  -------------- ------------------------- --------------- ------------------------------
  Brad Slaughter slaughterb@michigan.gov   Chris Dunham    cdunham@tnc.org

                                           Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

                                           Tim             tim.christiansen@us.army.mil
                                           Christiansen    
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Woody Wetland

Map Zones

41, 50, 51, 63

Geographic Range

This system occurs throughout the upper Midwest and northeastern United
States and adjacent Canadian provinces, including MI, MN, WI, Ontario,
Manitoba, Quebec, NY, NH, VT, ME, and northern IL, IN, and OH
(Faber-Langendoen 2001). This system also possibly occurs in PA, CT, NJ,
RI, MA, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. Within MZs 41, 50 and 51, this
system occurs in Section 222J (absent in 222Ji, and local in 222Jb, Jh,
Jg, and Je), local in 222Ud and Ue, 212H, 212R, 212S, 212J, 212X, 212T,
212Q, 222R, 212Z (local) 212K, 212N, 212M, 212L, 222K (local), 222L
(local) and 222M (local; Cleland et al. 2007).

Biophysical Site Description

This system is characterized by dense to open, low to medium-tall
forests of needle-leaf evergreen and deciduous trees on shallow organic
and deep peatland soils, occurring as discontinuous pockets or stringers
within upland vegetation communities having both short-return-interval
fire regimes (e.g., pine and oak-pine barrens) and long-return-interval
fire regimes (e.g., northern hardwoods). In Minnesota and the eastern UP
they may occur in very extensive delineations occupying thousands of
acres, and occur in patches several hundred to \>1,000ac in size in
northern WI and northern lower MI. Low hummocks and water-filled
depressions may be present, especially around the edges. These edges
tend to be rich fen in the closed canopy peatland. Forested rich
peatlands (pH \> 5.5) occur in closed wet depressions, especially in
small watersheds or catchment areas, and drains and toe slopes adjacent
to streams. Soils are very poorly drained, saturated throughout the
growing season in normal years, and may be deep organic peat (peatlands)
or less than 12in of organic peat over primarily sandy soils. Vegetative
composition and structure varies depending on landform, disturbance
history, and hydrology, including lateral flow of groundwater. The most
typical dominant canopy species is northern white-cedar (see MNDNR 2003,
Kost 2002, Christensen et al. 1959). Trees on poorly drained peats with
restricted groundwater movement may be stunted.

Vegetation Description

Northern white-cedar (*Thuja occidentalis*) is the characteristic
dominant canopy species in forested alkaline peatlands. It is commonly
associated with balsam fir (*Abies balsamea*), black spruce (*Picea
mariana*) and tamarack (*Larix laricina*). Occasional canopy species
include white spruce (*Picea alba*), hemlock (*Tsuga canadensis*), white
pine (*Pinus strobus*), black ash (*Fraxinus nigra*), red maple (*Acer
rubrum*), yellow birch (*Betula alleghaniensis*), paper birch (*B.
papyrifera*), American elm (*Ulmus americana*), quaking aspen (*Populus
tremuloides*), and bigtooth aspen (*P. grandidentata*). Hemlock and
white pine tend to occur on shallow peats or poorly drained mineral
soils. Hardwoods also become more common on shallow peats and hydric
mineral soils, or in frequently flooded zones (black ash and red maple,
in particular, in flood-prone areas), and may dominate or co-dominate
stands in the southern portion of BpS range. Tamarack is locally
dominant, and may replace northern white-cedar where lateral flow of
groundwater is minimal or absent. Shrubs are locally common,
particularly in recent windfalls. Characteristic species include tag
alder (*Alnus rugosa*), winterberry (*Ilex verticillata*), mountain
holly (*Nemopanthus mucronatus*), red-osier dogwood (*Cornus
stolonifera*), elderberry (*Sambucus canadensis*), huckleberry
(*Gaylussacia baccata*), autumn willow (*Salix serissima*) and Canada
yew (*Taxus canadensis*), the latter species having been significantly
reduced by deer herbivory (Van Deelen et al. 1996). Low shrubs include
Labrador tea (*Ledum groenlandicum*), blueberry (*Vaccinium
angustifolium*), bilberry (*V. myrtilloides*), leatherleaf
(*Chamaedaphne calyculata*), American fly honeysuckle (*Lonicera
canadensis*), hairy honeysuckle (*L. hirsuta*), swamp fly honeysuckle
(*L. oblongifolia*), wild black currant (*Ribes americanum*), swamp red
currant (*R. triste*) and swamp black current (*R. lacustre*). The
surface layer is dominated by mosses, primarily sphagnum. Brown mosses
dominate pools. *Pleurozium schreberi* and *Callicladium haldanianum*
may also be abundant. Liverworts are also abundant. The ground layer is
diverse, particularly in sedges, ferns and orchids. Characteristic
species include three-leaved Solomon's seal (*Smilacina trifolia*),
twinflower (*Linnaea borealis*), small northern bog orchid (*Platanthera
obtusata*), lesser rattlesnake plantain (*Goodyera repens*), yellow
lady\'s slipper (*Cypripedium parviflorum* var. *pubescens*), showy
lady\'s slipper (*C. reginae*), starflower (*Trientalis borealis*),
goldthread (*Coptis trifolia*), naked miterwort (*Mitella nuda*), dwarf
raspberry (*Rubus pubescens*), creeping snowberry (*Gaultheria
hispidula*), one-flowered pyrola (*Moneses uniflora*), *Carex leptalea*,
*C. disperma*, *C. gynocrates*, *C. trisperma*, *C. interior*, *C.
eburnea*, *C. vaginata*, bulbet fern (*Cystopteris bulbifera*), and oak
fern (*Gymnocarpium dryopteris*). Shrub and groundlayer density and
structure is variable, depending on canopy closure, microtopography and
hydrology. Vegetation data taken primarily from Kost (2002) and MNDNR
(2003).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  THOC2        *Thuja occidentalis*             Arborvitae

  ABBA         *Abies balsamea*                 Balsam fir

  PIMA         *Picea mariana*                  Black spruce

  LALA         *Larix laricina*                 Tamarack

  PIST         *Pinus strobus*                  Eastern white pine

  FRNI         *Fraxinus nigra*                 Black ash

  ACRU         *Acer rubrum*                    Red maple

  TSCA         *Tsuga canadensis*               Eastern hemlock
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Fire Regime Group characterized by low frequency, high severity fires.
Conifer- and hardwood-conifer dominated lowland forests occur as
isolated to extensive patches occurring in landscapes dominated by both
fire-prone and fire-resistant upland matrix systems, and the fire regime
is generally driven by the return interval of these upland vegetation
types. Fires may occur following drought cycles and may be severe, but
sites are typically very wet and fires are infrequent. Windthrow
disturbances occur as a result of shallow rooting, affecting single
trees and small to large patches of trees. Insect and disease outbreaks
primarily affect mature or overmature dominant trees in both closed and
open canopies, impacting black spruce, white spruce, tamarack, and
balsam fir in particular. Also, changes in hydrology, such as flooding
or draining due to the construction or destruction of beaver dams, are
another important disturbance in this system and typically change the
entire unit into a wetland with an open succession pathway.
Non-replacement mixed-severity fires can occur randomly in any class and
are randomly associated with lightning strikes or small fires in the
surrounding vegetation. Frequency will be about twice that of
replacement-stand fires, which were estimated to occur in Minnesota on a
920 year interval (Minnesota DNR 2003). Catastrophic windthrow may have
occurred on a 400-1000yr+ rotation, with a median of 700yrs. Light
windthrow (small patches) occurred on a rotation of 40-380yrs, with a
median of 85yrs.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

This BpS can range from thousands of acres to less than five acres in
size. The largest delineations typically occur in central and northern
MN and the eastern Upper Peninsula of MI. Scattered large delineations
also occur in northern Wisconsin, the western Upper Peninsula and
northern Lower Peninsula of MI, and northern WI. Delineations in the
southern portion of the Great Lakes region are generally small (\<100ac)
and widely distributed. These areas are generally homogeneous in
vegetation composition, but can vary considerably in overstory coverage
even within the same delineation. They may also contain scattered,
better-drained islands with mineral soils and hardwoods in the larger
delineations.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

This concept includes \"cedar swamps\" and associated hardwood-conifer
dominated lowland forests on alkaline substrates.

Issues or Problems

Separation of a cedar-dominated lowland/peatland was also discussed but
it was decided to not attempt to separate at this scale. \[BSS: acidic
peatlands were eliminated from the coarse model. Current model focuses
on cedar and hardwood-conifer dominated alkaline lowland forests.\] Fire
response was also determined to not be sufficiently different at this
time. Present maps of this BpS were also determined to be lacking in
accuracy. There was consensus that a great deal more acres actually
exist than are shown for MI and WI.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 14 Early Development 1 - All Structures

DBH

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**     **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                             Position**
  ------------ ----------------------- --------------------- ----------------
  LALA         Larix laricina          Tamarack              Upper

  ALIN2        Alnus incana            Gray alder            Mid-Upper

  ILVE         Ilex verticillata       Common winterberry    Mid-Upper

  VACO         Vaccinium corymbosum    Highbush blueberry    Middle
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Early successional stand following flooding or stand-replacing fire
(rare). Shrubs increase dominance over time, although open grass- and
sedge-dominated wet meadow may be dominant at first, particularly in
areas in which existing shrubs were flood-killed. Open to dense thicket
dominated by tag alder and winterberry, potentially associated with
willows, nannyberry and mountain holly. Early successional trees
establish (particularly tamarack and black ash) in the absence of
additional disturbance; northern white-cedar and/or white pine may
establish from seed following catastrophic fire.

This stage results from major disturbance, including stand-replacement
fire, flooding, or windthrow. Catastrophic windthrow is possible.
Replacement fire frequency likely varied across the region and depending
on the nature of the upland matrix in any given area (fire-dependent vs.
fire-intolerant).

Alder-dominated thickets are sometimes relatively stable and
long-persistent, but the concept used for this BpS is of a site that,
due to edaphic factors, favors the development of forested wetland in
the absence of major disturbance(s). In reality, a variety of early
successional communities can result from major disturbance of conifer or
conifer-hardwood dominated alkaline lowland forest.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\" DBH

Class B 11 Early Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ --------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis    Arborvitae         Upper

  PIMA         Picea mariana         Black spruce       Upper

  LALA         Larix laricina        Tamarack           Upper

  ACRU         Acer rubrum           Red maple          Mid-Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Scattered tree canopy develops from hardwood and conifer seedlings that
establish under shrubs. Typical species include black ash, tamarack,
northern white-cedar, and balsam fir. General appearance is of a
shrub-dominated system with an open tree canopy, grading into forested
wetland at the end of this period.

Catastrophic windthrow is possible. Replacement fire frequency likely
varied across the region and depending on the nature of the upland
matrix in any given area (fire-dependent vs. fire-intolerant).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class C 21 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ --------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis    Arborvitae         Upper

  PIMA         Picea mariana         Black spruce       Upper

  LALA         Larix laricina        Tamarack           Upper

  ACRU         Acer rubrum           Red maple          Mid-Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mid-aged stands dominated by cedar with some black spruce, balsam fir,
and tamarack; may include red maple; some shrub layer. Scattered
successional species (e.g., quaking aspen, paper birch) present in the
canopy, but declining as stands age.

This stage matures in the absence of major disturbance(s). Catastrophic
windthrow is possible. Replacement fire frequency likely varied across
the region and depending on the nature of the upland matrix in any given
area (fire-dependent vs. fire-intolerant).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class D 54 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ --------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis    Arborvitae         Upper

  PIMA         Picea mariana         Black spruce       Upper

  FRNI         Fraxinus nigra        Black ash          Upper

  ABBA         Abies balsamea        Balsam fir         Mid-Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mature, multi-seral stands typically dominated by northern white-cedar,
with black spruce and balsam fir usually important. Other canopy species
may include tamarack (but this typically in open microsites and
peripherally), white pine, hemlock, and a variety of hardwoods, the
latter in low numbers except where favored due to hydrology
(streambanks, frequently flooded areas) or substrate (thin organic or
mineral soils). Canopy cover may be lower in areas associated with
active groundwater discharge or peat deposition (these grade into open
rich fen).

This stage is maintained by frequent windthrow of single trees or small
to large patches of trees. Catastrophic windthrow is also possible.
Replacement fire frequency likely varied across the region and depending
on the nature of the upland matrix in any given area (fire-dependent vs.
fire-intolerant).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Brown, James K. and Smith, Jane Kapler, eds. 2000. Wildland fire in
ecosystems: effects of fire on flora. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol.
2. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 257
pp.

Christensen, E.M., J.J. Clausen and J.T. Curtis. 1959. Phytosociology of
the lowland forests of northern Wisconsin. The American Midland
Naturalist. 62: 232-247.

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Cleland, D.T., T.R. Crow, S.C. Saunders, D.I. Dickmann, A.L. MacLean,
J.K. Jordan, R.L. Watson and A.L. Sloan. 2004. Characterizing historical
and modern fire regimes in Michigan (USA): a landscape ecosystem
approach. Landscape Ecology. 19(3): 311-325.

Faber-Langendoen, D., ed. 2001. Plant communities of the Midwest:
Classification in an ecological context. NatureServe, Arlington, VA. 61
pp. plus appendix (705 pp.).

Frelich, Lee E. 2002. Forest dynamics and disturbance regimes: Studies
from temperate

evergreen-deciduous forests. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
266 pp.

Futyma, R.P. and N.G. Miller. 2001. Postglacial history of a marl fen:
Vegetational stability at Byron-Bergen Swamp, New York. Canadian Journal
of Botany. 79: 1425-1438.

Iverson, Louis R., Anantha M. Prasad, Betsy J. Hale and Elaine K.
Sutherland. 1999. Atlas of current and potential future distributions of
common trees of the eastern United States. General Technical Report
NE-265. Radnor, PA: USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Research Station.
245 pp.

Kost, M.A. 2002. Natural community abstract for rich conifer swamp.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 9 pp.

Kuchler, A.W. 1964. Conifer Bog (Larix-Picea-Thuja). #94 In: Manual to
accompany the map Potential Natural Vegetation of the United States. New
York, NY: The American Geographical Society. 156 pp.

Kudray, Greg. 2002. Field guide: Hiawatha National Forest ecological
classification system (September 30, 2002, DRAFT). Helena, MT:
Ecological Inventory and Analysis, USA.

Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 2003. Field guide to the
native plant communities of Minnesota: the Laurentian Mixed Forest
province. St. Paul, MN: Ecological Land Classification Program,
Minnesota County Biological Survey and Natural Heritage and Nongame
Research Program. 352 pp.

Schmidt, Kirsten M., James P. Menakis, Colin C. Hardy, Wendel J. Hann
and David L. Bunnel. 2002. Development of coarse-scale spatial data for
wildland fire and fuel management. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-87. Fort
Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service,

Rocky Mountain Research Station. 41 pp.+CD.

USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences
Laboratory (2002, December). Fire Effects Information System \[Online:
May 26, 2004\]. http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.

Van Deelen, T.R., K.S. Pregitzer and J.B. Haufler. 1996. A comparison of
presettlement and present-day forests in two northern Michigan deer
yards. American Midland Naturalist. 135: 181-194.
