# 13130 {#section .BpS_Title}

# North-Central Interior Beech-Maple Forest {#north-central-interior-beech-maple-forest .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                           **Reviewers**   
  -------------- ----------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Becky Schillo  schillor@michigan.gov   Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  None           None                    None            None

  None           None                    None            None
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

47, 50, 51

Geographic Range

This mesic forest type extends through MI and eastern WI and is limited
by the distribution of beech (Fagus grandifolia). North of the tension
zone in WI and MI, this would be replaced by the Laurentian-Acadian
Northern Hardwoods Forest system (13020). In MZ51, this system replaces
the North-Central Interior Maple-Basswood Forest (13140).

In MZ50, this type is limited to Subsections 222Kc, 222Ke, 222Kf and
222Kg.

Biophysical Site Description

The North-Central Interior Beech-Maple forest occurred on rich, mesic
sites that were protected from fire by the oak-aspen buffer lying
between this community and the prairie and or by natural fuel breaks.
They also occurred on upland sites with moist soils, usually in settings
protected from fire.

For LANDFIRE mapping, soils are generally Alfisols, with low percentages
of sand (\<15%) and moderate percentages of silt (\>30%). SSURGO
taxonomic particle sizes of "fine," "fine-silty," "fine-loamy," "loamy"
are associated with the distribution of this system."

Plants in these communities have access to predictable supplies of water
and nutrients, but they are often limited by light because of the dense
forest canopy. Typical sites are buffered from seasonal drought by
fine-textured moisture-retaining soils or dense subsoil layers.
Essential nutrients are mineralized from decaying organic matter at
twice the rate of that in fire-dependent forest or wet forest
communities.

Vegetation Description

Sites are characterized by continuous, often dense, canopies of
deciduous trees and understories of shade-adapted shrubs and herbs.
Dominant trees species in the canopy and subcanopy include sugar maple,
beech, basswood, northern red oak, red elm, American elm, ironwood,
bitternut hickory, black ask, green ash and muscle wood. Canopy
associates may include white oak, hackberry, butternut, black walnut,
black cherry, yellow birch and Kentucky coffee-tree. The sparse shrub
layer is dominated by sugar maple and other young tree species in
addition to prickly gooseberry, chokecherry, alternate leaved dogwood,
prickly ash and red-berried elder (MNDNR 2005).

The ground flora is dominated by spring ephemerals which complete their
life cycle in the spring before the canopy trees have leafed out and
cast a dense shade on the understory. Common ground cover species
include Dutchman\'s breeches (Dicentra cucullaria), cut-leaved toothwort
(Cardamine concatenata), bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis), Virginia
waterleaf (Hydrophyllum virginianum), violet (Viola pubescens), wild
leek (Allium tricoccum), blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides), early
meadow-rue (Thalictrum dioicum), bedstraw (Galium aparine), sweet cicely
(Osmorhiza claytonii), jack-in-the-pulpit (Arisaema triphyllum),
trilliums (Trillium spp.) and wood anemone (Anemone quinquefolia).
(MNDNR 2005, Curtis 1959)

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ACSA3        *Acer saccharum*                 Sugar maple

  TIAM         *Tilia americana*                American basswood

  POTR5        *Populus tremuloides*            Quaking aspen

  FAGR         *Fagus grandifolia*              American beech

  QURU         *Quercus rubra*                  Northern red oak

  CACA18       *Carpinus caroliniana*           American hornbeam

  ULAM         *Ulmus americana*                American elm

  FRPE         *Fraxinus pennsylvanica*         Green ash
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Fire Regime V characterizes this system, dominated by high-intensity,
low-frequency fires that occur in greater than 1000yr intervals.
Low-intensity fires surface fires may have been more frequent in the
mid-seral stages of this BpS when more fire-prone species (such as oak)
comprise a larger component of the tree canopy. Light surface fires
would result in the partial loss of trees and are estimated at a
rotation of about 50yrs (MNDNR 2005).

Historically, this forest type, composed of fire-sensitive species, was
not disturbed by fire except during periods following catastrophic wind
events or extreme drought. Grimm (1984) states "the fire regimes of
deciduous forests, such as bigwoods, are much different from the
commonly perceived model of fire regime, in which fuels and fire danger
increase with time and in which intense crown fires cause great
destruction of the forest." In maple-basswood forests, decomposition of
potential fuels is rapid, and is particularly rapid on base-rich soils
(Bormann and Likens 1979), such as those of the Big Woods. Because of
the dense shade, the cover of herbs and shrubs is sparse. Thus little
fuel exists at the ground level, tree trunks are not very flammable, and
the open tree crowns do not carry fire very well. Moreover, low solar
radiation, high humidity, and low wind speeds prolong the moisture
retention of ground-level fuels (Kucera 1952), thereby inhibiting the
ignition and spread of fire. These forests are sometimes referred to as
the "asbestos forests" because of their fireproof character (Vogl 1967).
Ordinarily, only the leaf litter ever reaches a flammable state, and
only patchy creeping ground fires occur (Niering et al. 1970, Barden and
Woods 1973).

Two primary disturbance factors are used to model this system.
Catastrophic windthrow affects mature stands and occurs on an
approximately 600-700yr rotation (MNDNR 2005). Replacement fire occurs
primarily in young and windthrown stands and occurs on a rotation of
approximately 1000yrs. In addition, surface fires occur in young stands
\<100yrs of age which contain a significant component of oak. The
disturbance probabilities by class applied in the model are contained in
the VDDT documentation section.

Per the Illinois Fire Needs Assessment survey, Fire Return Intervals for
this system (currently) are on average 7 years to maintain good quality
habitat in this system and 3 years to restore degraded habitats back to
this system. No information on burn severity was provided.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

The most common disturbance extent could best be characterized as a
single-tree or small-group gap-phase dynamic. Replacement events would
have encompassed hundreds to thousands of acres. Patch sizes would
generally conform to landforms on which they are found.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Historically, elm was a canopy component within the maple-beech forest
(Grimm 1981). However, this species has been largely eliminated from
this system due to Dutch elm disease. American elm (Ulmus americana) is
now generally only present in the understory and midstory in
contemporary forests, whereas historically it would have been the
occasional canopy dominant.

Uncharacteristic conditions in this setting include infestation by
exotic earthworms of European species that have affected or begun to
affect soil conditions, herb/forb species representation and tree
regeneration (Hale et al. 1999). Habitat for the rare Great Lakes
endemic fern, Botrychium mormo, is largely eliminated after worm
invasion.

Issues or Problems

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 8 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ --------------------- --------------------- ------------------
  POTR5        Populus tremuloides   Quaking aspen         Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana       American basswood     Upper

  QURU         Quercus rubra         Northern red oak      Upper

  ACSA3        Acer saccharum        Sugar maple           Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Characterized by early-seral young forest following a catastrophic wind
or fire event. Young forest dominated by aspen, birch, northern red oak,
basswood and American elm \<35yrs. Sugar maple is not likely to
establish immediately following fire, but regeneration may be heavy
following windthrow events.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class B 9 Mid Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**        **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ------------------- ---------------------- ------------------
  ACSA3        Acer saccharum      Sugar maple            Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana     American basswood      Upper

  QURU         Quercus rubra       Northern red oak       Upper

  FAGR         Fagus grandifolia   American beech         Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Characterized by mid-succession maturing forest. In this stage there is
the gradual decline of northern red oak and it is replaced by sugar
maple and beech. American elm and basswood increase while aspen senesces
and is eliminated from the system.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class C 14 Mid Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**        **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ------------------- ---------------------- ------------------
  ACSA3        Acer saccharum      Sugar maple            Upper

  FAGR         Fagus grandifolia   American beech         Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana     American basswood      Upper

  ULAM         Ulmus americana     American elm           Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Characterized by late-successional maturing forest. Forest dominated by
sugar maple, beech, basswood, American elm, ironwood, northern red oak.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

Class D 69 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**        **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ------------------- ---------------------- ------------------
  ACSA3        Acer saccharum      Sugar maple            Upper

  FAGR         Fagus grandifolia   American beech         Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana     American basswood      Upper

  ULAM         Ulmus americana     American elm           Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

These old late-seral forests (\>150yrs) are the end point of succession.
Forest dominated by sugar maple, beech, basswood, American elm,
ironwood, northern red oak. Small gap disturbances predominate to
maintain a high proportion of the acreage in this class.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. In this late seral
stage there would be a multi-layer canopy and sub-canopy (created
through small-scale windthrow).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Barden, L.S. and F.W. Woods. 1973. Characteristics of lightning fires in
southern Appalachian forests. Proc. Of Tall Timbers Fire Ecol. Conf.
13:345-361.

Bormann, F.H. and Likens, G.E. 1979. Catastrophic disturbance and the
steady state in northern hardwood forests. American Scientist. 67:
660-669.

Canham, Charles D. and Orie L. Louck. 1984. Catastrophic windthrow in
presettlement forests of Wisconsin. Ecology. 65(3): 803-809.

Cleland, D.T., S.C. Saunders, T.R. Crow, D.I. Dickmann, A.L. Maclean,
J.K. Jordan, R.L. Watson and A.M. Sloan. 2004. Characterizing historical
and modern fire regimes in the lake states: a landscape ecosystem
approach. Landscape Ecology. 19: 311--325.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. The Vegetation of Wisconsin. The University of
Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.

Frelich, Lee E. and Craig G. Lorimer. 1991. Natural disturbance regimes
in hemlock-hardwood forests of Upper Great Lakes region. Ecological
Monographs. 61: 145-164.

Grimm, Eric C. 1981. Chronology and dynamics of vegetation change in the
prairie-woodland region of southern Minnesota, USA. New Phytologist. 93:
311-350.

Grimm, E.C. 1984. Fire and other factors controlling the Big Woods
vegetation of Minnesota in the mid-nineteenth century. Ecological
Monographs. 54: 291-311.

Hale, C., L. Frelich and P. Reich. 1999. Unpublished. Research proposal
concerning earthworms and population dynamics and diversity of native
plant species. University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota.

Kucera, C.L. 1952. An ecological study of a hardwood forest area in
central Iowa. Ecological Monographs 22:283299.

Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (2005). Field Guide to the
Native Plant Communities of Minnesota: The Eastern Broadleaf Forest
Province. Ecological Land Classification Program. Minnesota County
Biological Survey, and Natural Heritage and Nongame Research Program.
MNDNR St. Paul, MN.

Niering, W.A., Godwin, R.H. and Taylor, S. 1970. Prescribed burning in
southern New England: Introduction to long-range studies. Tall Timbers
Fire Ecology Conference. 10: 267-286.

Runkle, James Reade. 1982. Patterns of disturbance in some old growth
mesic forests of eastern North America. Ecology. 63(5): 1533-1546.

Schmidt, Kirsten M., James P. Menakis, Colin C. Hardy, Wendel J. Hann
and David L. Bunnell. 2002. Development of coarse-scale spatial data for
wildland fire and fuel management. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-87. Fort
Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: 41
pp+CD.

USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences
Laboratory (2002, December). Fire Effects Information System,
\[Online\]. http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.

Vogl, R.J. 1967. Controlled burning for wildlife in Wisconsin. Proc,
Tall Timbers

Fire Ecol Conf 6: 47-96.

Webb, T. III, P.J. Bartlein, S.P. Harrison and K.H. Anderson. 1993.
Vegetation, lake levels, and climate in eastern North America for the
past 18,000 years. In: Wright, H.E. Jr., J.E. Kutzbach, T. Webb III,
W.F. Ruddiman, F.A. Street-Perrot and P.J. Bartlein, eds. Global
Climates Since the Last Glacial Maximum. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press: 415-467.
