# 13442 {#section .BpS_Title}

**Boreal Jack Pine-Black Spruce Forest - Spruce-Fir**

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Updated: 4/25/2018

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                          **Reviewers**   
  --------------- --------------------- --------------- -----------------
  Donald Mikel    dmikel@fs.fed.us      Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  Jean Perkins    jeperkins@fs.fed.us                   

                                                        
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51

Model Splits or Lumps

This biophysical setting is lumped with 1301

Geographic Range

In map zone 51, this type occurs in 212 H, R and S (all subsections
contained within; Cleland et al. 2007).

Biophysical Site Description

This community occurs in upland positions, often with loamy shallow
soils within bedrock-controlled landforms (Heinselman 1996). The Boreal
Forest dominates the Canadian landscape, although it is widespread on
Isle Royale and some boreal plants and trees locally are dominant on
cold, wet sites in the Upper Peninsula.

This system covers areas in northern Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.
Soils are deeper and/or finer-textured than soils in the jack pine
forest that allowed dense development of mixed aspen, birch, balsam fir,
white spruce, and red maple forests (Frelich and Reich 1998).

The Latin derivation of \"boreal\" is \"personification of the North
Wind.\" It is a poetic way of describing the northern lands of rivers,
lakes, forests that grow on the rock face of the earth. Boreal forests
consist of a mixture of hardwood, deciduous trees, and evergreen
conifers like pine and spruce, that keep their green mantles all year
around. Mixed in are shrubs like juniper, sumac, and scrub willow.
Deciduous trees include maple, elm, oak, and birch. Boreal forests are
home to a wide diversity of flora and fauna.

Moose and deer browse in the openings; eagles and other raptors are
common. Beaver and bear are evident through three of the four seasons.
The boreal forests of Canada represent some of the last wild frontiers
left in North America (Schaetzl 2002).

Vegetation Description

The spruce-fir is composed of a mixture of balsam fir, white spruce,
paper birch, black spruce, cedar, and quaking aspen (Heinselman 1996).
In areas where the landscape was interspersed with small wetlands,
tamarack also was an important component of post-fire forests (Frelich
and Reich 1998). Species dominance was determined by time since past
disturbance, incidence of spruce budworm, neighborhood effects of seed
source and dispersion (Frelich and Reich 1995), and associated
successional dynamics. Almendinger and others (Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources 2005) described successional trajectories within this
community as having three growth stages separated by two transition
periods. Initially, young stands, predominantly aspen with jack pine and
birch, dominated for the first 35yrs following fire. Then, during a
transition period between 35-55yrs following fire, aspen and jack pine
declined and paper birch, white pine, red pine, and balsam fir
increased, along with the establishment of white spruce seedlings. Once
established, mature mixed forests of paper birch and white pine, with a
reduced presence of balsam fir, persist up to \~100yrs. Another
transition period marked by significant increase in white spruce and
decline of aspen and birch occurs for a couple of decades. At around
115yrs following a fire, stable, long-lived white pine and white spruce
dominated the canopy, with lesser amounts of balsam fir and paper birch
present as subordinates.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  PIMA         *Picea mariana*                  Black spruce

  ABBA         *Abies balsamea*                 Balsam fir

  PIGL         *Picea glauca*                   White spruce

  THOC2        *Thuja occidentalis*             Arborvitae
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Fire Regime Group IV is applicable, with fires occurring every 60-150yrs
and high stand-replacement severity. Severe stand-replacing wind events
affect mature stands on an approximate 1000yr interval. In the absence
of fire, spruce budworm outbreaks are likely after about age 60yrs.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

None

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

This system was mapped separately from 13651 (Boreal White
Spruce-Fir-Hardwood Forest-Great Lakes Inland), though there are
significant similarities, especially in the description.

Issues or Problems

Hemlock occur in Wisconsin and Michigan

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

Prior to LANDFIRE Remap this BpS was named Great Lakes Spruce-Fir.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 32 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class A: Early-seral aspen-birch.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Seedling \<4.5ft

Class B 34 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper

  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper

  ABBA         Abies balsamea         Balsam fir         Low-Mid

  PIGL         Picea glauca           White spruce       Low-Mid
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class B: Mid-age with aspen-birch overstory and mid-tolerant understory.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class C 25 Mid Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**     **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- ------------------- --------------------
  PIGL         Picea glauca        White spruce        Upper

  ABBA         Abies balsamea      Balsam fir          Upper

  PIMA         Picea mariana       Black spruce        Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class C: Mid-age stands dominated by white and black spruce and balsam
fir.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 9 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**       **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- --------------------- -------------------
  PIGL         Picea glauca        White spruce          All

  ABBA         Abies balsamea      Balsam fir            All

  PIMA         Picea mariana       Black spruce          All

  PIST         Pinus strobus       Eastern white pine    All
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Class D: Old stands \>200yrs. End point of succession. In nature, cover
overlaps with C as trees have reached maximum height in C. Canopy cover
could be greater than 60%.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Heinselman, M. 1996. The Boundary Waters Wilderness Ecosystem.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 334 pp.

Frelich, L.E. and P.B. Reich. 1998. Disturbance severity and threshold
responses in the boreal forest. Conservation Ecology \[online\] 2(2): 7.

Frelich, L.E. and P.B. Reich. 1995. Spatial patterns and succession in a
Minnesota southern boreal forest. Ecological Monographs 65: 325-346.

Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (2005). Field Guide to the
Native Plant Communities of Minnesota: The Eastern Broadleaf Forest
Province. Ecological Land Classification Program. Minnesota County
Biological Survey, and Natural Heritage and Nongame Research Program.
MNDNR St. Paul, MN.
