# 13652 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Boreal White Spruce-Fir-Hardwood Forest - Coastal {#boreal-white-spruce-fir-hardwood-forest---coastal .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 4/17/2018

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                            **Reviewers**   
  --------------- ----------------------- --------------- ----------------
  Joshua Cohen    cohenjo@michigan.gov    Randy Swaty     rswaty@tnc.org

  Kimberly Hall   hallkim@msu.edu         None            None

  None            None                    None            None
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

51

Model Splits or Lumps

This BpS is lumped with 1301

Geographic Range

Boreal forest is a circumboreal formation that has existed as a dominant
assemblage in the northern Great Lakes region of the US and Canada for
approximately10,000yrs, following the retreat of the glaciers. Within
North America, boreal forest is primarily found throughout Canada,
ranging into Alaska. Within the Lake States and Ontario province, boreal
forest is found in central Ontario, throughout northern Minnesota, along
the tip of the Door Peninsula in Lake Michigan and along the Lake
Superior shoreline in Wisconsin and within northern Michigan.

Within Michigan, this forest type is predominantly found on Great Lakes
islands and along coastal areas of the northernmost portion of the Lower
Peninsula and throughout the Upper Peninsula; less frequently, boreal
forest occurs in localized inland areas of the Upper Peninsula.
Interpretation of notes of the general land surveyors indicate that
circa 1800, boreal forest primarily occurred in the northern Lower
Peninsula in Alpena, Cheboygan, Charlevoix, and Emmet Counties and in
the Upper Peninsula, boreal forest was concentrated in Keweenaw,
Chippewa, Ontonogan, Delta and Mackinac Counties. Coastal boreal forest
occurs in the northern Lower Peninsula in section 212H and
subsubsections 212HI, 212Hj, and 212Hf and throughout the Upper
Peninsula in sections 212R, 212S, 212Y, 212J and subsections 212Rd,
212Re, 212Ra, 212Rc, 212Sc, 212Sq, 212Sn, 212Sb, 212Ya, and 212Jb along
the Great Lakes shoreline (Flakne 2003, Comer et al. 1995, Stearns et
al. 1982, Maycock and Curtis 1960, Curtis 1959, Nichols 1935).

Biophysical Site Description

Boreal forest typically occupies upland sites (often with local wet
places) along shores of the Great Lakes, on islands in the Great Lakes
(e.g. Isle Royale, Drummond Island, Beaver Island) and locally inland
(e.g. restricted areas in the Negaunee Michigamme Highlands). Coastal
boreal forests occur primarily on sand dunes, in glacial lakeplains, and
on thin soil over bedrock, both igneous and calcareous (e.g., limestone
and dolomite cobble or pavement). Farther inland, moderately drained
lakeplain and outwash deposits occasionally support these forests.
Within lakeplain, boreal forest is often found in areas with poorly
expressed dune and swale topography. Coastal boreal forests occurring
along the mainland often form narrow, linear bands while archipelagic
boreal forests often occupy broader areas of variable shape along the
island shoreline, especially along the southwestern portion of the
island (Harman and Plough 1986). Near shore boreal forests occupy
peninsulas, former embayments, and coves. Topography of these systems
ranges widely from gently sloping on lakeplain systems too steep
topography on high dune fields, especially where eolian features have
been deposited on moraines.

Proximity to the Great Lakes results in modified climate with cool,
relatively equable temperature, short growing season, abundant available
moisture during the growing season often in the form of fog or mist, and
deep snows in the winter (Harman and Plough 1986, Curtis 1959 and
Potzger 1941). Sand, loamy sand and sandy loam soils are typically
moderately acid to neutral, but heavier soils (e.g., silty loam and clay
loams) and more acid and alkaline conditions are found. Boreal forests
that occur over limestone bedrock or cobble often are characterized by
shallow organic soils or mull humus. Conifer dominance in the canopy
results in a litter layer that is typically more acidic than the
underlying organic and mineral soils. Water-retaining capacity of the
soils is variable with sandy soils typically being well-drained and
soils with heavier texture, such as loams, ranging from moderately
drained to poorly drained. Inland boreal forest systems usually occur on
moderately drained lakeplain or outwash (Comer et al. 1995, Stearns et
al. 1982, Curtis 1959).

Vegetation Description

Dominated by *Abies balsamea, Picea glauca*, and *Thuja occidentalis*
with *Betula papyrifera* and *Populus tremuloides*, shifting toward
*Betula* and *Populus* following fire events, and towards conifers in
the absence of fire. *Thuja occidentalis* dominance is most prevalent in
sand dunes and on thin soils over neutral-alkaline bedrock or glacial
deposits, such as in the Straits of Mackinac and in the northeastern
Lower Peninsula (Comer et al. 1995). White spruce is more prevalent on
drier sites while balsam fir is more common on wetter sites (Curtis
1959). Additional canopy associates include *Pinus strobus, Populus
balsamifera,* and *Tsuga canadensis* and less frequently *Picea mariana,
Pinus resinosa, Pinus banksiana,* and *Acer rubrum*. In contrast to
coastal boreal forests, inland systems are often characterized by an
increased canopy component of *Pinus strobus* and *Tsuga canadensis* and
deciduous species as the result of more frequent fire disturbance
(Curtis 1959, Comer et al. 1995). *Acer spicatum, A. pennsylvanicum,
Sorbus americana* and *S. decorus* are characteristic of the subcanopy
and understory. Where *Populus* and/or *Betula* dominate the canopy,
conifers are prevalent in the subcanopy and understory. Additional
understory or tall shrub species include *Cornus rugosa, Alnus rugosa*,
and *Sheperdia canadensis*. Characteristic low shrubs include *Lonicera
canadensis, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Taxus canadensis, Ribes cynosbati,
Vaccinium myrtilloides, Diervilla lonicera, Juniperus communis*, and
*Rubus pubescens*. Groundlayer species are a mix of species found in
mesic northern forest and northern swamp types, but prominent among them
are *Actaea rubra, Aralia nudicaulis, Aster macrophyllus, Carex eburnea,
C. deweyana, Clintonia borealis, Coptis trifolia, Cornus candensis,
Drypoteris* spp., *Galium triflorum, Goodyera* spp. (i.e., *G.
oblongifolia* and *G. repens*), *Linnaea borealis, Mainthemum canadense,
Mitella nuda, Mitchella repens, Pteridium aquilinum, Polygala
paucifolia, Smilacina stellata, Streptopus roseus, Trientalis borealis*,
and *Viola* spp. *Cypripedium arietinum* and *Iris lacustris* are
uncommon, but characteristic. Mosses and Usnea lichens often are
abundant due to favorable, moist conditions (MNFI Database 2007,
Rutkowski and Stottlemyer 1993, Harman and Plough 1986, Stearns et al.
1982, Buell and Martin 1961, Maycock and Curtis 1960, Curtis 1959, Buell
and Niering 1957, Potzger 1941, Darlington 1940, Grant 1934).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  THOC2        *Thuja occidentalis*             Arborvitae

  PIGL         *Picea glauca*                   White spruce

  ABBA         *Abies balsamea*                 Balsam fir

  BEPA         *Betula papyrifera*              Paper birch

  POTR5        *Populus tremuloides*            Quaking aspen
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Proximity to the Great Lakes results in the moderation of the
microclimate of coastal boreal forests with higher humidity, greater
snowfall, lower summer temperatures, warmer winter temperatures and
greater summer fog and mist compared to the adjacent inland areas
(Curtis 1959, Potzger 1941). Natural disturbance regime characterized by
frequent windthrow and insect epidemics, which are typically small-scale
events. Because many sites lie next to the Great Lakes and trees are
shallowly rooted, windthrow and snap-off rates are high (Comer et al.
1995, Curtis 1959, Grant 1934); balsam fir is especially susceptible to
windthrow and breakage (Buell and Martin 1961). *Choristoneura
fumiferana* (Spruce budworm) defoliates both spruce and balsam fir but
tends to be more detrimental to the later (Curtis 1959). Interactions of
blowdowns, insects, and climate (i.e., droughts) influence fire regimes
of boreal forests. Infrequent catastrophic fires are an important
disturbance factor (Curtis 1959), especially in inland boreal forests.
Estimations for fire return interval for Canadian boreal forests range
from 74-142yrs (Larsen and MacDonald 1998). Given the prevailing
landscape position of most Great Lakes boreal forests (along the
shoreline), the fire return interval for these systems was probably
\>300yrs with fire return intervals more similar to Canadian forests for
inland Great Lakes systems. Large-scale disturbance events in boreal
forests can lead to the development of even-aged stands while
small-scale disturbance factors can lead to uneven-aged systems (Comer
et al. 1995, Stearns et al. 1982, Maycock and Curtis 1960, Curtis 1959).

Selective browsing by moose in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (Isle
Royale) can result in the alteration of species composition, community
structure and ultimately forest successional patterns of boreal forests.
On sites with spruce and balsam fir, moose preferentially browse on
balsam fir retarding fir vertical growth, limiting fir abundance and
imparting a competitive advantage to spruce (Risenhoover and Maass
1987).

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Infrequent fires burned large areas (hundreds of acres), killing all or
most overstory species. Small-scale outbreaks of spruce budworm likely
occurred every 30-60yrs, killing primarily balsam fir over small scale
(10s of acres); occasional wind storms blew down trees over small scale
(ten or more acres).

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

The coastal variant of the boreal white spruce-fir hardwood forest
(511365-1) would be found within one km of the Great Lakes shoreline and
across any island or Peninsula within the Great Lakes such as Beaver
Island, Bois Blanc Island, Drummond island, and the Garden Peninsula.
The inland variant is located approximately more than one km inland
within the main portions of the Lower and Upper Peninsulas.

Along shorelines, boreal forest often shares an abrupt boundary with
coastal communities such as cobble beach, sand/gravel beach, open dunes,
limestone bedrock lakeshore, Great Lakes marsh and Great Lakes barrens
and gradually grades to mesic northern forest or less frequently rich
conifer swamp, limestone bedrock glade or alvar inland from the
lakeshore. Mapped as Spruce-Fir-Cedar Forest on Comer et al.\'s (1995)
circa 1800 vegetation map. Coastal boreal forests are typically within
1000m of the shoreline and correspond to conifer dominated current land
cover.

Issues or Problems

Need more research on spruce budworm impacts (what is scale and
intensity of disturbance?). Disturbance return intervals (i.e., fire,
wind and insect) for boreal forests are derived from Canadian systems
and from research from Minnesota. Estimations of fire size are based on
polygon size of spruce-fir-cedar forest from circa 1800 vegetation map
(Comer et al. 1995).

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

High levels of deer herbivory can result in regeneration failure of
cedar.

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 4 Early Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

High density seedling-sapling-pole aspen-birch stand following
stand-replacement fire event. This class occurs following catastrophic
fire which is assumed to occur at low fire frequency (300-500yrs)
compared to inland boreal forest systems. Low levels of conifer
regeneration, which increase over time through seeding in. Catastrophic
fire exposes mineral soil and reduces conifer competition, imparting
competitive advantage to birch and aspen.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. Ecologically, class A
and B overlap in structural data (canopy closure and tree height/size)
as these are both early seral stages that result from different
replacement events (i.e. fire vs. wind). Class A consists of deciduous
tree species while class B consists of coniferous tree species.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class B 13 Early Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ --------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  ABBA         Abies balsamea        Balsam fir         Upper

  PIGL         Picea glauca          White spruce       Upper

  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis    Arborvitae         Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

High density seedling-sapling-pole fir-spruce-cedar stand following
catastrophic windthrow and moderate severity fire which leave adequate
seed source to impart competitive advantage to conifers over early
successional hardwoods.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class C 4 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  BEPA         Betula papyrifera      Paper birch        Upper

  POTR5        Populus tremuloides    Quaking aspen      Upper

  ABBA         Abies balsamea         Balsam fir         Low-Mid

  PIGL         Picea glauca           White spruce       Low-Mid
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mature aspen-birch with spruce-fir-cedar understory development.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 79 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ --------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis    Arborvitae         Upper

  PIGL         Picea glauca          White spruce       Upper

  ABBA         Abies balsamea        Balsam fir         Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Spruce-fir-cedar forest. Spruce budworm and small-scale windthrow events
create small canopy gaps which maintain uneven-aged structure. Frequency
of large-scale insect events needs further research.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Buell, M.F., and W.A. Niering. 1957. Fir-spruce-birch forest in northern
Minnesota.

Ecology 38(4): 602-610.

Buell, M.F., and W.E. Gordon. 1945. Hardwood-conifer forest contact zone
in Itasca

Park, Minnesota. American Midland Naturalist 34(2): 433-439.

Buell, M.F., and W.E. Martin. 1961. Competition between maple-basswood
and fir-

spruce communities in Itasca Park, Minnesota. Ecology 42(2): 428-429.

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A.

Corner, and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan's presettlement vegetation, as
interpreted from the General Land Office Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. Digital map.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Darlington, H.T. 1940. Some vegetational aspects of Beaver Island, Lake
Michigan.

Papers of the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters 25: 31-37.

Flakne, R. 2003. The Holocene vegetation history of Isle Royale National
Park, Michigan, USA. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 33: 1144-1166.

Grant, M.L. 1934. The climax forest community in Itasca County,
Minnesota, and its

bearing upon the successional status of the pine community. Ecology
15(3): 243-257.

Harman, J.R., and J. Plough. 1986. Asymmetric distribution of coniferous
trees on

northern Lake Michigan Islands. The East Lakes Geographer 21: 24-33.

Heinselman, M.L. 1973. Fire in the virgin forests of the Boundary Waters
Canoe Area, Minnesota. Journal of Quarternary Research 3: 329-382.

Larsen, C.P.S. and MacDonald, G.M. 1998. An 840-year record of fire and
vegetation in a boreal white spruce forest. Ecology 79: 106-118.

Maycock, P.F., and J.T. Curtis. 1960. The phytosociology of boreal
conifers -- Hardwood forests of the Great Lakes Region. Ecological
Monographs 30: 1-35.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory. Natural History Database-BIOTICS.
2007.

Nichols, G.E. 1935. The hemlock-white pine-northern hardwood region of
eastern North

America. Ecology 16: 403-422.

Potzger, J.E. 1941. The vegetation of Mackinac Island, Michigan: An
ecological survey.

American Midland Naturalist 25(2): 298-323.

Risenhoover, K.L., and S.A. Maass. 1987. The influence of moose on
composition and

structure of Isle Royale forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research
17: 357-364.

Rutkowski, D.R., and R. Stottlemyer. 1993. Composition, biomass, and
nutrient distribution in mature northern hardwood and boreal forest
stands, Michigan. American Midland Naturalist 130(1): 13-30.

Stearns et al. 1982. Ecology and geology of the Superior Upland Region:
A theme study

for the National Park Service.
