# 13940 {#section .BpS_Title}

# North-Central Interior Oak Savanna {#north-central-interior-oak-savanna .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 3/18

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                           **Reviewers**   
  ---------------- --------------------- --------------- -----------------------------
  Michael Kost     kostma@michigan.gov   Robert Dana     Robert.Dana@dnr.state.mn.us

  Nancy Braker     nbraker@tnc.org       Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

                                                         

  Christopher      weberc@michigan.gov   Alan Haney      ahaney@uwsp.edu
  Weber                                                  
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Reviewed by:** Monika Shea

Vegetation Type

Steppe/Savanna

Map Zones

50, 51

Geographic Range

Northern oak savanna occurs in a complex, shifting mosaic with oak
woodlands, barrens and prairies in the upper midwest. This type occurs
in southern lower Michigan, northwestern Ohio, northern Indiana,
northeastern Illinois, southern Wisconsin, Ontario and southeastern to
northwestern Minnesota. This savanna/woodland/prairie type historically
occurred as an ecotone between oak-hickory forest and tallgrass prairie.

Biophysical Site Description

Northern oak savanna occurs primarily on level to rolling topography of
glacial outwash and glacial lake plains, coarse-textured end moraines
and steep ice-contact features (Cohen 2004a, NatureServe 2004, Michigan
Natural Features Inventory 2003, Cohen 2001, Albert 1995, Chapman 1984).
Savanna also dominated the non-glaciated Driftless Area in Wisconsin,
Minnesota, Iowa, and Illinois (Shea et al. 2014). Soils are
well-drained, moderately-fertile sands, loamy sands, sandy loams and
loams with medium-acid to neutral pH (5.6 to 7.3) and low water
retaining capacity (NatureServe 2004, Michigan Natural Features
Inventory 2003, Chapman 1984). In general, oak savannas are most
prevalent on the western side of major firebreaks such as rivers
(Leitner et al. 1991, Grimm 1984, Curtis 1959). In the 1800s, oak
savanna communities covered some 11-13 million ha (27-32 million ac) of
the Midwest (Nuzzo 1986).

Vegetation Description

Today, northern oak savanna in the upper Midwest is limited to small,
degraded remnants. As a result, little is known about the original
composition and vegetative patterning of these systems (Leach and
Givnish 1999). Information in this section is derived from historical
accounts, early plant collections and extrapolation based on remnants
within Midwestern states. The oak openings were described by settlers as
park-like savanna of widely spaced mature oaks with a wide range of
shrub cover above the forb and graminoid ground layer (Chapman 1984,
Peters 1970, Cottam 1949, Stout 1946). The community was composed of
broad-crowned, scattered oaks with a species-rich forb and graminoid
ground layer composed of species associated with both prairie and forest
communities (Leach and Givnish 1999).

The canopy layer generally varied from 10-60% cover (NatureServe 2004)
and was dominated by *Quercus alba* (white oak) with co-dominants
including *Q. macrocarpa* (bur oak) especially in the west, and *Q.
velutina* (black oak) (NatureServe 2004, Chapman 1984, Cottam 1949).
Black oak was more dominant in areas of northern Iowa, southern
Wisconsin, and Michigan. White oak, black oak and bur oak with their
thick bark, deep roots and resprouting abilities are the most
fire-resistant of the oaks. In addition, expansive root systems that can
extend down several meters and branch extensively laterally allow these
oaks to withstand extreme drought stress (Faber-Langendoen and Tester
1993, Abrams 1992, Albertson and Weaver 1945). These species of oak are
long-lived, often remaining as canopy dominants for 200-300yrs (Cottam
1949). Important canopy associates include, *Carya ovata* (shagbark
hickory), *Quercus rubra* (red oak) and *Quercus velutina* (black oak)
and in Michigan, *Carya glabra* (pignut hickory) (NatureServe 2004).
Oaks, especially black oak, are dispersed in the understory as
fire-suppressed grubs which reach just over a meter tall (Anderson and
Bowles 1999; Bowles and McBride 1998; Brewer and Kitler 1989; Peters
1970). Shrubs occur scattered or clumped in the understory, ranging
widely in cover from 0-50% depending on fire frequency (Pruka and
Faber-Langendoen 1995). The most common shrubs are fire-tolerant species
such as *Corylus americana* (American hazelnut), *Ceanothus americanus*
(New Jersey tea) and *Amorpha canescens* (lead-plant) (NatureServe 2004;
Bader 2001; Cottam 1949; Veatch 1927). Shrubs such as *Cornus foemina*
(gray dogwood), *Prunus americana* (wild plum) and *Rhus glabra* (smooth
sumac) occasionally form thickets in fire-protected microsites
(NatureServe2004; Bader 2001; Kline 1997).

The predominantly graminoid ground layer is composed of species
associated with both prairie and forest communities. For a given oak
savanna, the proportion of forbs to graminoids was likely a function of
light availability and soil texture with graminoids increasing with sand
and solar irradiance and forb coverage increasing with silt content and
shade (Leach and Givnish 1999). Grasses, which provided the primary
source of fine fuel for annual fires, reached heights of over a meter in
areas of high light intensity (Anderson 1991a). Common grass species
included *Andropogon gerardii* (big bluestem), *Schizachyrium scoparium*
(little bluestem) and *Sorghastrum nutans* (Indian grass). Prevalent
forbs included *Amphicarpea bracteata* (hog peanut), *Anemone
virginiana* (thimbleweed), *Asclepias purpurascens* (purple milkweed),
*Asclepias tuberosa* (butterfly-weed), *Aster laevis* (smooth aster),
*Coreopsis palmata* (prairie coreopsis), *Desmodium canadense* (showy
tick-trefoil), *Eupatorium sessilifolium* (upland boneset), *Euphoribia
corollata* (flowering spurge), *Galium boreale* (northern bedstraw),
*Gentiana flavida* (white gentian), *Lathyrus venosus* (veiny pea),
*Lespedeza capitata* (bush-clover), *Monarda fistulosa* (wild-bergamot),
*Pycnanthemum virginianum* (mountain mint), *Rudbeckia hirta*
(black-eyed Susan), *Silene stellata* (starry campion), *Solidago
juncea* (early goldenrod), *Taenidia integrima* (yellow pimpernel),
*Triosteum perfoliatum* (horse-gentian, feverwort), *Veronicastrum
virginicum* (Culver's root) and *Zizia aurea* (golden alexanders). (List
compiled from NatureServe 2004; Bader 2001; Pruka 1995; Leach and Ross
1995; Packard 1988; Chapman 1984; Bray 1960; Curtis 1959).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  QUAL         *Quercus alba*                   White oak

  QUVE         *Quercus velutina*               Black oak

  QUMA2        *Quercus macrocarpa*             Bur oak

  ANGE         *Andropogon gerardii*            Big bluestem

  CORYL        *Corylus*                        Hazelnut

  SCHIZ4       *Schizachyrium*                  Little bluestem

  SONU2        *Sorghastrum nutans*             Indiangrass

  CEAM         *Ceanothus americanus*           New jersey tea
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Cottam (1949) and Curtis (1959) suggested that oak savannas originated
when prairie fires spread into surrounding closed oak forest with enough
intensity to create open canopy conditions (also see Anderson and Bowles
1999, Anderson and Brown 1986). Other researchers have proposed that
savannas also originated following invasion of prairie by oaks during
prolonged lulls in annual fire regimes (Anderson and Bowles 1999, Grimm
1984). Repeated low-intensity fires working in concert with drought and
windthrow then maintained these savannas (Faber-Langendoen and Tester
1993, Curtis 1959, Stout 1946). Within dry-mesic savanna systems, such
as oak openings, it is likely that annual or nearly annual fire
disturbance was the primary abiotic factor influencing savanna structure
and composition. Fires prevented canopy closure and the dominance of
woody vegetation (Leitner et al. 1991). Presently, the prevalent
catalyst of fires is lightning strike, but historically, Native
Americans played an integral role in the fire regime, accidentally
and/or intentionally setting fire to prairie and savanna ecosystems
(Anderson and Bowles 1999; Bowles and McBride 1998; Dorney and Dorney
1989; Chapman 1984; Grimm 1984; Day 1953). However, the spatial extent
of indigenous fire impact is unknown (Munoz et al 2014). Where
large-scale herbivores (i.e., elk and bison) were abundant, grazing may
have helped inhibit the succession of oak savanna to woodland (Ritchie
et al. 1998; McClain et al. 1993).

The character of oak savannas can differ dramatically, primarily as the
result of varying fire intensity and frequency, which are influenced by
climatic conditions, soil texture, topography, size of physiographic and
vegetative units, and landscape context (i.e., proximity to water bodies
and fire-resistant and fire-conducive plant communities) (Anderson and
Bowles 1999, Chapman et al. 1995). Historically, fire regimes were also
influenced by the number and distribution of indigenous peoples (Chapman
1984). Infrequent, high-intensity fires may kill mature oaks and produce
savannas covered by abundant scrubby oak sprouts. Park-like openings
with widely spaced trees and an open graminoid/forb understory are
maintained by frequent, low-intensity fires, which occur often enough to
restrict maturation of oak seedlings and encroachment by other woody
species (Peterson and Reich 2001, Chapman et al. 1995, Faber-Langendoen
and Davis 1995).

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

The expected fire regimes for this type are I (frequent ground fires)
and III (mixed severity). The ground fire was the more commonly
occurring fire disturbance, but when dry conditions combined with dense
stand conditions, a mixed-severity fire could result, with the fire
crowning into the canopy where fuel ladders were present. The scale of
these fires is thought to occur on 10s of 1000s of acres.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

The northern oak savanna type includes several matrix communities such
as mesic and dry-mesic oak openings, dry oak barrens, mixed oak and
oak-hickory woodlands, and a variety of small and large patch prairie
types.

Today, northern oak savanna in the upper Midwest is limited to small,
degraded remnants. Circa 1800, oak savanna communities covered some
11-13 million ha (27-32 million ac) of the Midwest. Presently oak
savanna remnants occur on just 00.02% of their circa 1800 extent (Nuzzo
1986). Following European settlement of prairies, settlement and
conversion to agriculture of oak savanna rapidly followed (Kenoyer
1930). Many towns, college campuses, parks and cemeteries of the Midwest
were established on former oak savanna (Packard 1988, Bronny 1989,
Chapman 1984).

Alteration of historic fire regimes has shifted most oak savannas into
woodlands and forest (Faber-Langendoen 1993, Curtis 1959, Cottam
1949).The decrease in Native American populations across the Midwest in
the 1700-1800s likely resulted in a decrease in fire frequency. Wildfire
suppression policies instituted in the 1920s in concert with road
construction, expansion of towns, and increased agriculture caused a
dramatic decrease in fire frequency and intensity (Abrams 1992). The
reduction of fire in the landscape resulted in the succession of open
oak savanna to closed-canopy forests with little advanced regeneration
of oaks and a vanishing graminoid component (Chapman et al. 1995). With
the absence of fire, oak savannas converted to closed canopy forest
within decades (estimates range from 25-40yrs) (Stout 1946, Curtis 1959)
with more mesic savannas, such as bur oak plains, deteriorating more
rapidly (Packard 1993, Abrams 1992). The rapid conversion to oak forest
occurred because of the prevalence in the understory of oak grubs, which
are repeatedly fire-suppressed oaks with huge root masses that allowed
them to achieve canopy ascension following release from annual fires
(Bowles and McBride 1998; Kline 1997; Chapman 1984; Cottam 1949).
Frequently these oak grubs were Quercus velutina (black oaks), which
became canopy codominants with the advent of fire suppression.

Oak savanna remnants are often depauperate in floristic diversity as the
result of fire suppression and subsequent woody encroachment, livestock
grazing, and the invasion of exotic species. Sustained grazing
introduced soil disturbance, prevented oak establishment, and caused
decreases in native forbs and grasses with increases in weeds (native
and exotic) (Jones 2000, McPherson 1997, Bray 1960). Groundlayer
vegetation of savanna remnants has been inhibited by low levels of light
filtering through the dense overstories and impenetrable understories
(often dominated by exotic shrubs) and by the thick litter layers that
have accumulated from over a century of fire suppression (Bowles and
McBride 1998 ).

Issues or Problems

Mixed fire probability changed from 500yrs to 40yrs in class C by MH
Weber at MiFSL to fix reference condition proportions in LANDSUM
(12.170.07). This type covers a broad geographic range and encompasses a
variety of savanna, barrens, woodlands and prairie types that may have
experienced different surface fire return intervals ranging from one to
five years. Historical fire size is unknown but historical accounts
indicate that vast acreages burned within a single fire event.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 6 Early Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem      Upper

  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium          Little bluestem   Upper

  QUMA2        Quercus macrocarpa     Bur oak           Upper
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Prairie grasses and forbs dominate open grassland with scattered oak
grubs and clumps of shrubs.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Seedling \<4.5ft

Class B 16 Mid Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak         Upper

  QUMA2        Quercus macrocarpa     Bur oak           Upper

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem      Lower

  CORYL        Corylus                Hazelnut          Middle
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Scattered young oak trees and clumps of shrubs occur within a matrix of
prairie grasses and forbs. Maximum tree cover is 10% but herbaceous
cover can range up to 100%.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class C 65 Late Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak         Upper

  QUMA2        Quercus macrocarpa     Bur oak           Upper

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem      Lower

  CORYL        Corylus                Hazelnut          Low-Mid
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This is a system of widely-scattered, large-diameter oaks and shrub
clumps within a matrix of prairie grasses and forbs (10-60% canopy
closure).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

Class D 12 Late Development 2 - Open

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                        Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak         Upper

  QUMA2        Quercus macrocarpa     Bur oak           Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina       Black oak         Upper
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Open canopy (60-80% canopy) oak-dominated woodland with high stem
density. These oak groves occupy areas of the landscape that frequently
escape fire due to topographic position.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\"DBH

Class E 1 Late Development 3 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  QUAL         Quercus alba           White oak           Upper

  QUMA2        Quercus macrocarpa     Bur oak             Upper

  CAOV2        Carya ovata            Shagbark hickory    Upper

  PRSE2        Prunus serotina        Black cherry        Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This is a closed-canopy (81-100%) oak-dominated forest with scattered
hickories. These oak groves occupy areas of the landscape that
frequently escape fire due to topographic position.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Abrams, M.D. 1992. Fire and the development of oak forests. BioScience.
42(5): 346-353.

Abrams, M.D. and G.J. Nowacki. 1992. Historical variation in fire, oak
recruitment, and post-logging accelerated succession in central
Pennsylvania. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club. 119: 19-28.

Albert, D.A. 1995. Regional landscape ecosystems of Michigan, Minnesota,
and Wisconsin: A working map and classification. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-178.
St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment
Station. Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center Home Page.
http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/1998/rlandscp/rlandscp.htm. (Version
03JUN98.) 250 pp.

Albertson, F.W. and J.E. Weaver. 1945. Injury and death or recovery of
trees in prairie climate. Ecological Monographs. 15(4): 393-433.

Anderson, R.C. 1991. Illinois prairies: A historical perspective.
Symposium Proceedings: Our Living Heritage: 384-391.

Anderson, R.C. and L.E. Brown. 1986. Stability and instability in plant
communities following fire. American Journal of Botany. 73(3): 364-368.

Anderson, R.C. and M.L. Bowles. 1999. Deep-soil savannas and barrens of
the Midwestern United States. In Anderson, R.C., J.S. Fralish and J.M.
Baskin, eds. Savannas, Barrens, and Rock Outcrop Plant Communities of
North America. Cambridge, UK: 155-170.

Bader, B.J. 2001. Developing a species list for oak savanna/oak woodland
restoration at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Arboretum. Ecological
Restoration. 19(4): 242-250.

Beal, W.J. 1904. Some of the changes now taking place in a forest of oak
openings. Papers of the Michigan Academy of Science. 4: 107-108.

Bowles, M.L. and J.L. McBride. 1998. Vegetation composition, structure,
and chronological change in a decadent midwestern North American savanna
remnant. Natural Areas Journal. 18(1): 14-27.

Bray, J.R. 1960. The composition of savanna vegetation in Wisconsin.
Ecology. 41(4): 721-732.

Brewer, R. and S. Kitler. 1989. Tree distribution in southwestern
Michigan bur oak openings. Michigan Botanist. 28: 73-79.

Chapman, K.A. 1984. An ecological investigation of native grassland in
southern Lower Michigan. MA thesis, Western Michigan University. 235 pp.

Chapman, K.A. M.A. White, M.R. Huffman and D. Faber-Langendoen. 1995.
Ecology and stewardship guidelines for oak barrens landscapes in the
upper Midwest. In: Stearns, F. and K. Holland, eds. Proceedings of the
Midwest Oak Savanna Conference, 1993. U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Internet Publications. 21 September 2000
\<http://www.epa.gov/glnpo/oak/oak93/chapman.html\>: 1-29.

Cohen, J.G. 2004a. Natural community abstract for oak openings. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 9 pp.

Cohen, J.G. 2004b. Natural community abstract for bur oak plains.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 13 pp.

Cottam, G. 1949. The phytosociology of an oak woods in southwestern
Wisconsin. Ecology. 30(3): 271-287.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Day, G.M. 1953. The Indian as an ecological factor in the northeastern
forest. Ecology. 34(2): 329-346.

Dorney, C.H. and J.R. Dorney. 1989. An unusual oak savanna in
northeastern Wisconsin: The effects of Indian-caused fire. American
Midland Naturalist. 122(1): 103-113.

Faber-Langendoen, D. 1993. A proposed classification for savannas in the
Midwest. Background paper for the Midwest Oak Savanna Conference, 1993.
18 pp.

Faber-Langendoen, D. and M.A. Davis. 1995. Effects of fire frequency on
tree canopy cover at Allison Savanna, east-central Minnesota, USA.
Natural Areas Journal. 15(4): 319-328.

Faber-Langendoen, D. and J.R. Tester. 1993. Oak mortality in sand
savannas following drought in east-central Minnesota. Bulletin of the
Torrey Botanical Club. 120 (3): 248-256.

Grimm, E.C. 1984. Fire and other factors controlling the Big Woods
vegetation of Minnesota in the mid-nineteenth century. Ecological
Monographs. 54(3): 291-311.

Jones, J. 2000. Fire history of the bur oak savannas of Sheguiandah
Township, Manitoulin Island, Ontario. Michigan Botanist 39: 3-15.

Kline, V.M. 1997. Orchards of oak and a sea of grass. In: Packard, S.
and C.F. Mutel, eds. The Tallgrass Restoration Handbook. Island Press,
Washington, DC: 3-21.

Kost, M.A. 2004. Natural community abstract for woodland prairie.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 8 pp.

Lanman, C. 1871. The Red Book of Michigan: Civil, Military and
Biographical History. E.B. Smith & Company, Detroit, MI.

Leach, M.K. and L. Ross. 1995. Midwest oak ecosystems recovery plan: A
call to action.

111 pp.

Leach, M.K. and T.J. Givnish. 1999. Gradients in the composition,
structure, and diversity of remnant oak savannas in southern Wisconsin.
Ecological Monographs. 69(3): 353-374.

Leitner, L.A. C.P. Dunn, G.R. Guntenspergen, F. Stearns and D.M. Sharpe.
1991. Effects of site, landscape features, and fire regime on vegetation
patterns in presettlement southern Wisconsin. Landscape Ecology. 5(4):
203-217.

McClain, W.E., M.A. Jenkins, S.E. Jenkins and J.E. Ebinger. 1993.
Changes in the woody vegetation of a bur oak savanna remnant in central
Illinois. Natural Areas Journal. 13(2): 108-114.

McPherson, G.R. 1997. Ecology and Management of North American Savannas.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ. 208 pp.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory, 2003. Draft description of Michigan
natural community types. (Unpublished manuscript revised March 4, 2003.)
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 36 pp.
http://www.msue.msu.edu/mnfi/lists/natural_community_types.pdf.

Munoz, S.E., D.J. Mladenoff, S. Schroeder, and J.W. Williams. 2014.
Defining the spatial patterns of historical land use associated with the
indigenous societies of eastern North America. Journal of Biogeography
41: 2196-2210.

NatureServe, 2004. NatureServe Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life
\[web application\]. Version 40.0. NatureServe, Arlington, VA. 11
September 2004

http://www.natureserve.org/explorer.

Nuzzo, V. 1986. Extent and status of Midwest oak savanna: Presettlement
and 1985. Natural Areas Journal. 6(2): 6-36.

Packard, S. 1988. Just a few oddball species: Restoration and the
rediscovery of the tallgrass savanna. Restoration and Management Notes.
6(1): 13-21.

Peters, B.C. 1970. Pioneer evaluation of the Kalamazoo County landscape.
Michigan Academician. 3(2): 15-25.

Peterson, D.W. and P.B. Reich. 2001. Prescribed fire in oak savanna:
Fire frequency effects on stand structure and dynamics. Ecological
Applications. 11(3): 914-927.

Pruka, B. 1995. Lists indicate recoverable oak savannas and oak
woodlands in southern Wisconsin. Restoration and Management Notes.
13(1): 124-126.

Pruka, B. and D. Faber-Langendoen. 1995. Midwest oak ecosystem recovery
plan: A call to action. Proceedings of the 1995 Midwest Oak Savanna and
Woodland Ecosystem Conferences. 19 January 2004
http://www.epa.gov/glnpo/ecopage/upland/oak/oak95/app-b.htm.

Ritchie, M.E., D. Tilman and J.M.H Knops. 1998. Herbivore effects on
plant and nitrogen dynamics in oak savanna. Ecology. 79(1) 165-177.

Shea, M. E., L. A. Schulte, and B. J. Palik. 2014. Reconstructing
Vegetation Past: Pre-Euro-American Vegetation for the Midwest Driftless
Area, USA. Ecological Restoration 32:417--433.

Stout, A.B. 1946. The bur oak openings of southern Wisconsin.
Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Science, Arts and Letters. 36:
141-161.
