# 14071 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Laurentian Pine-Oak Barrens {#laurentian-pine-oak-barrens .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 4/13/2018

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                                **Reviewers**   
  -------------- ---------------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Doug Cox       mdeecology@frontiernet.net   Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  Becky Schillo  schillor@michigan.gov        Brendan Ward    bward@fs.fed.us

  None           None                         None            None
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Steppe/Savanna

Map Zones

41, 50, 51

Model Splits or Lumps

This Biophysical Setting (BpS) was split into two - 1407-1 (Laurentian
Pine-Oak Barrens) and 1407-2 (Jack-Pine Barrens)

Geographic Range

Laurentian Pine-oak Barrens were located on sandy outwash plains located
along the climatic tension zone in Michigan and Wisconsin. In Michigan
the system occurs along the Sandusky lakeplain, the Newaygo Outwash
Plain, and in several counties of the Upper Peninsula, including
Menominee, Dickinson, Delta and Chippewa counties (Comer et al. 1995).
In Michigan, presently the distribution of this community is
concentrated in the Newaygo Outwash Plain with additional remnants in
the sandy outwash plains of Menominee and Dickinson counties and the
sandy lakeplain of Huron County (Cohen 2000). In Michigan the system
occurred in subsections 212 Ha, Hb, Hg, Ka; 222 Ja, Jb; 212 Tb, Td and
212 Rc.

Laurentain pine-oak barrens also occurred in Wisconsin between the
southern oak barrens/ savanna and northern jack pine barrens (Cochrane
and Iltis 2000, Curtis 1959). In Wisconsin, this system occurred in
Subsections 212 Ta, 222 Kb, 222 Ra and Rb, 212 Qa, Qb, Qc and Qd.

Biophysical Site Description

The Laurentian pine-oak barrens system is endemic to very dry,
nutrient-impoverished landscape ecosystems. Pine-oak barrens occur on
nearly level to slightly undulating ground in well-drained sandy glacial
outwash, sandy glacial lakeplains, and less often on sandy areas in
coarse-textured moraines. Soils of this xeric, fire-prone community are
generally coarse-textured, well-drained sand or loamy sand of medium to
slightly acid pH and low water retaining capacity. Soils typically lack
the fine-textured alluvial horizon associated with soils of the oak
openings and are thus more droughty. Oak-pine and oak barrens typically
occur in bands surrounding prairie (Michigan Natural Features Inventory
1990). They are generally found in transitional areas along the tension
zone (Cohen 2000).

Vegetation Description

The oak-pine barrens community is a heterogeneous savanna vegetation
type. Structurally oak-pine barrens range from dense thickets of brush
and understory scrub oak and pine amongst a matrix of grassland to
park-like open woods of widely spaced mature oak and pines with
virtually no shrub or sub-canopy layer above the open forb and graminoid
understory (Chapman et al. 1995, Lohrentz and Mattei 1995, Michigan
Natural Features Inventory 1990). The physiognomic variations, which
occur along a continuum, are the function of the frequency and intensity
of fire (Lohrentz and Mattei 1995). Typically, oak-pine barrens grade
into prairie on one front and dry forest on the other. As noted by
Curtis (1959), the flora of this community is a mixture of prairie and
forest species.

The canopy layer generally varies from 5-60% cover (Chapman et al. 1989)
and is dominated or co-dominated by the following trees: *Quercus alba*
(white oak), *Quercus velutina* (black oak), *Quercus ellipsoidalis*
(northern pin oak), *Pinus strobus* (white pine), *Pinus resinosa* (red
pine) and *Pinus banksiana* (jack pine). The above species of pine and
oak are also prevalent in the sub-canopy in shrubby clumps, especially
where fire intensity is high. In addition, *Acer rubra* (red maple),
*Prunus serotina* (black cherry), *Populus grandidentata* (bigtooth
aspen), and *Populus tremuloides* (trembling aspen) are often found in
the overstory and sub-canopy of this community. Along the transition
zone and to the south, the most common overstory dominants are white
oak, black oak and white pine. North of the transition zone, northern
pin oak replaces black oak and red pine and jack pine become more
prevalent in the canopy layer. (Michigan Natural Features Inventory
1990).

Characteristic shrubs include: *Amelanchier* spp. (serviceberry),
*Arctostaphylos uva-ursi* (bearberry or kinnikinick), *Ceanothus
americanus* (New Jersey tea), *Comptonia peregrina* (sweetfern),
*Corylus americana* (American hazelnut), *Cornus* spp (dogwood species),
*Corylus cornuta* (beaked hazelnut), *Cratageus* spp (hawthorn species),
*Gaultheria procumbens* (wintergreen), *Gaylussacia baccata*
(huckleberry), *Prunus americana* (wild plum), *Prunus virginiana*
(choke cherry), *Prunus pumila* (sand cherry), *Quercus prinoides*
(dwarf chestnut or dwarf chinkapin oak), *Rosa carolina* (pasture rose),
*Rubus flagellaris* (northern dewberry), *Salix humilis* (prairie or
upland willow) and *Vaccinium angustifolium* (low sweet blueberry).

The ground layer is dominated by graminoids and forbs. Common species
include *Scizhachyrium scoparium* (little bluestem), *Andropogon
gerardii* (big bluestem) and *Carex pensylvanica* (Pennsylvania sedge),
with Pennsylvania sedge often replacing the bluestems in shaded areas,
fire suppressed communities, and north of the transition zone. Other
prevalent herbs of the oak-pine barrens include: *Aster oolentangiensis*
(sky-blue aster), *Aureolaria* spp. (false foxglove), *Coreopsis
lanceolata* (tickseed), *Danthonia spicata* (poverty oats), *Deschampsia
flexuosa* (hair grass), *Euphorbia corollata* (flowering spurge),
*Helianthus divaricatus* (Divaricate sunflower), *Koeleria macrantha*
(June grass), *Krigia biflora* (dwarf dandelion), *Lathyrus ochroleucus*
(white pea), *Lespedeza hirta* (hairy lespedeza), *Liatris cylindrica*
(dwarf blazing star), *Lupinus perennis* (wild lupine), *Monarda
fistulosa* (wild bergamot), *Pedicularis canadensis* (wood betony) and
*Stipa avenacea* (needle grass).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  QUAL         *Quercus alba*                   White oak

  QUEL         *Quercus ellipsoidalis*          Northern pin oak

  QURU         *Quercus rubra*                  Northern red oak

  QUPA2        *Quercus palustris*              Pin oak

  QUVE         *Quercus velutina*               Black oak

  PIST         *Pinus strobus*                  Eastern white pine

  PIBA2        *Pinus banksiana*                Jack pine

  PIRE         *Pinus resinosa*                 Red pine
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Frequent fire and, in some places, frost and drought conditions,
maintain open canopy conditions by limiting the development of woody
vegetation and thereby allowing the maintenance of a mixture of grasses
and sedges.

Curtis (1959) suggested that oak barrens originated when prairie fires
spread into surrounding closed oak forest with enough intensity to
create open barrens. Repeated low intensity fires working in concert
with periodic drought then maintain these barrens. Oak-pine barrens
persist when fire disturbance prevents canopy closure and the dominance
of woody vegetation. Presently, the prevalent catalyst of such fires is
lighting strike but historically, Native Americans played an integral
role in the fire regime, accidentally and/or intentionally setting fire
to prairie ecosystems (Chapman 1984, in Lohrentz and Mattei 1995).

The character of oak-pine barrens can differ dramatically as the result
of varying fire intensity and frequency, which is influenced by climatic
conditions, soil texture, and topography. Infrequent, high intensity
fires kill mature oaks and produce barrens covered by scrubby oak
sprouts and scattered pines, which survived the burn. Park-like barrens
with widely spaced trees and an open grass understory are maintained by
low intensity, frequent fires, which occur often enough to restrict oak
seedlings (Chapman et al. 1995, Lohrentz and Mattei 1995). Frequent
fires of low intensity can maintain high levels of grass and forb
diversity by deterring the encroachment of woody vegetation and limiting
the dominance of the mat-forming *sedge Carex pensylvanica*,
(Pennsylvania sedge) (Corner 1996).

Diseases such as oak wilt also influenced the structure and species
composition of pine-oak barrens. Oak wilt would have affected all oak
species with white oak being more resistant to wilt than other oak
species. Two-lined chestnut borer would affect oak species. Budworms
could also pine species in the barrens. These insect breaks would have
eliminated groups or clumps of trees.

Intense weather events such as tornados, down-bursts, or severe
windthrow would have been infrequent in this system but severe if and
when they did occur.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Historically there was considerable variation in the size and intensity
of fires in pine-oak landscapes. As a result pine-oak barrens existed as
a small to large patch within a matrix of prairies, barrens and pine-oak
forests.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Most of the historical oak-pine barrens have been degraded by selective
logging, livestock grazing, and fire suppression or destroyed by
extensive timber harvest followed by slash fires and conversion to tree
farms or plantations. Plant species of oak-pine barrens can persist
through cycles of canopy closure and removal (Chapman et al., 1989).

Laurentian pine oak barrens may be confused with or mistaken for BpS
1407-2 Jack Pine Barrens, BpS 1395 North-Central Oak Barrens, or 1394
North-Central Interior Oak-Savanna. This system may also be referred to
as jack pine barrens, oak barrens, or simply barrens. This system can be
distinguished from North-Central Oak Barrens (13950) based on greater
dominance of Jack pine, and it becomes the more likely barrens oak type
in Province 212.

Currently much of this system may be in a closed state due to fire
suppression and may exist as a closed canopy oak or pine forest.
Additionally, a large portion of the historic range of this system has
been planted to pine plantation.

In the absence of fire and with the prevalence of anthropogenic
disturbance such as logging, off-road vehicle recreation, and livestock
grazing, the following exotic species may be dominant components of the
herbaceous layer of oak-pine barrens: *Centaurea maculosa* (spotted
knapweed), *Hieracium* spp. (hawkweeds), *Poa compressa* (Canada
bluegrass), *Poa pratensis* (Kentucky bluegrass) and *Rumex acetosella*
(sheep sorrel).

Issues or Problems

Need to acquire more detailed information about distribution of pine-oak
barrens in Minnesota. Need more research on frequency of historical
surface fire. What constitutes pine-oak barrens versus pine-oak forest
or dry sand prairie depends on temporal and spatial scales.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 9 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ --------------------- -------------------- -----------------
  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium         Little bluestem      Lower

  CAPE6        Carex pensylvanica    Pennsylvania sedge   Lower

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii   Big bluestem         Lower
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

In this class sedges and grasses are dominant, with scattered oak grubs,
pine regeneration and low shrubs. There would also be oak re-sprouts
from top-killed trees.

Although it is not possible to model compound disturbances in VDDT,
historically subsequent fires occurring within a short time period (i.e.
two or more fires within 10-20yrs) could produce scrub oak structure
with shrubby, small-stemmed patches of oaks and shrub species
interspersed with patches of prairie grasses (Will-Wolf and Stearns in
Anderson et al. 1999). This vegetation is also captured in class A of
this model.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 1 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**     **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ----------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana         Jack pine           Low-Mid

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis   Northern pin oak    Low-Mid

  QUAL         Quercus alba            White oak           Low-Mid

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa          Red pine            Low-Mid
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This stage is a mid-seral closed stage dominated by dense oak and pine
saplings with shade intolerant shrubs coming in under the tree saplings.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class C 26 Mid Development 2 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                         Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ ------------------
  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis  Northern pin oak   Upper

  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana        Jack pine          Upper

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa         Red pine           Upper

  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium          Little bluestem    Lower
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Grasses and sedges are dominant lifeform although scattered oaks and
pines would be the upper layer lifeform. Typically, herbaceous species
are \<1m in height. Minimum cover for herbaceous species is
approximately 40%, while maximum coverage is 70%. Tree species may occur
singly or in small clumps. Maple and aspen species may also be present.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

Class D 62 Late Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                         Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ ------------------
  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana        Jack pine          Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis  Northern pin oak   Upper

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa         Red pine           Upper

  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium          Little bluestem    Lower
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Grasses and sedges are dominant lifeform although scattered oaks and
pines would be the upper layer lifeform. Typically, herbaceous species
are less than a meter in height. The vegetation of this class is similar
to class C except that this class has more mature trees. Aspen and other
pioneer species would senesce.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\"DBH

Class E 2 Late Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**     **Common Name**         **Canopy
                                                               Position**
  ------------ ----------------------- ----------------------- ---------------
  PiBA2        \<NOT FOUND IN NRCS\>   \<NOT FOUND IN NRCS\>   Upper

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa          Red pine                Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis   Northern pin oak        Upper

  QUVE         Quercus velutina        Black oak               Upper
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class is a closed-canopy pine-oak forest that results after
prolonged periods of fire suppression or microtopography that protects
forest from fires (approximately 50yrs+).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Albert, D.A. 1995. Regional landscape ecosystems of MI, MN and WI: a
working map and classification. USFS -- North Central Forest Experiment
Station. 1992 Folwell Ave. St. Paul, MN 55108. 250 pp.

Albert, D.A., S.R. Denton and B.V. Barnes. 1986. Regional landscape
ecosystems of Michigan. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, School of
Natural Resources. 32 pp. and map.

Anderson, R.C., J.S. Fralish and J.M. Baskin. 1999. Savannas, Barrens,
and Rock Outcrop Plant Communities of North America. Cambridge
University Press: Cambrisge, UK. 470 pp.

Barnes, B.V. 1991. Deciduous forests of North America. Pp 219-344 in E.
Röhrig and B. Ulrich (eds.) Ecosystems of the World 7: Temperate
Deciduous Forests. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Cleland, D.T., T.R. Crow, S.C. Saunders, D.I.. Dickmann, A.L. Maclean,
J.K.Jordon, R.L. Watson, A.M. Loan and K.D. Brosofske. 2004.
Characterizing historical and modern fire regimes in michigan (USA): A
landscape ecosystem approach. Landscape Ecology. 19: 311--325.

Cochrane, T.S. and H.H. Iltis. 2000. Atlas of the Wisconsin Prairie and
Savanna Flora. Pages 8-47. Department of Natural Resources, Madison, WI.

Chapman, K.A. 1984. An ecological investigation of native grassland in
Southern Lower Michigan. M.A. thesis, Western Michigan University.
Chapman, K.A., M.A. White and M.R. Huffman. 1989. Draft: Oak barrens
stewardship abstract. Midwest Heritage Task Force, The Nature
Conservancy. Minneapolis, MN.

Chapman, K.A., M.A. White and M.R. Huffman. 1989. Draft: Oak barrens
stewardship abstract. Midwest Heritage Task Force, The Nature
Conservancy. Minneapolis, MN.

Chapman, K.A., M.A. White, M.R. Huffman and D. Faber-Langendoen. 1995.
Ecology and stewardship guidelines for oak barrens landscapes in the
upper Midwest. In Forest Stearns and Karen Holland, eds., Proceedings of
the Midwest Oak Savanna Conference, 1993. U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Internet Publications. Cohen, J.G. 2000. Natural community
abstract for oak-pine barrens. Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI.
6 pp.

Cohen, J.G. 2000. Natural community abstract for oakpine barrens.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 6 pp.

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A. Corner and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan's
presettlement vegetation, as interpreted from the General Land Office
Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing MI.
digital map.

Corner, R.A. 1996. Natural community abstract for pine barrens. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 3 pp.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University. Of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. The Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. Pp. 295-307. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.

Faber-Langendoen, D. 1993. A proposed classification for savannas in the
Midwest. Background paper for the Midwest oak savanna conference. 8 pp.

Faber-Langendoen, D. (editor). 1999. International classification of
ecological communities: Terrestrial vegetation of the Midwestern United
States. The Nature Conservancy, Midwest Conservation Science Department,
Minneapolis MN.

Forest stewardship training materials for oak-pine barrens ecosystem.
(Unpublished manuscript). NatureServe: An online encyclopedia of life
\[web application\]. 2000. Version 1.0 . Arlington (VA): Association for
Biodiversity Information. Available: http://www.natureserve.org/.
(Accessed: September 11, 2000).

Hauser, R.S. 1953. An ecological analysis of the isolated prairies of
Newaygo County, Michigan. Ph.D dissertation, Michigan State College.

Kotar, J, J.A. Kovach and T.L. Burger. 2002. A guide to forest
communities and habitat types of northern Wisconsin, 2nd ed. Madison,
WI: University of Wisconsin Department of Forest Ecology and Management.

Lohrentz, M. and L. Mattei. 1995. Newaygo prairie- barrens ecosystem
site conservation plan. 59 pp.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory. 1990. Draft description of Michigan
natural community types. (Unpublished manuscript revised April 2, 1990).
Michigan Natural Features Inventory. 1995.

NatureServe. 2007. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA. Data current as of 10 February 2007.

Nuzzo, V. 1986. Extent and status of Midwest oak savanna: presettlement
and 1985. Natural Areas Journal 6: 6-36.
