# 14072 {#section .BpS_Title}

**Laurentian Pine-Oak Barrens - Jack Pine**

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                            **Reviewers**   
  --------------- ----------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Dave Pergolski  mail373013@pop.net      Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  Becky Schillo   schillor@michigan.gov   None            None

  Joshua Cohen    cohenjo@michigan.gov    None            None
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Reviewed by:** Brad Slaughter

Vegetation Type

Forest and Woodland

Map Zones

41, 50, 51

Model Splits or Lumps

This BpS is split into multiple models:

This model is for the jack pine and jack pine-red pine forests of
northern MN, WI, and MI.

Geographic Range

System occurs in northern lower MI, northern WI (212Ka), northern MN and
eastern Ontario, north of the climatic tension zone (Curtis 1959) and is
concentrated in the High Plains subsection in northern lower MI and in
central WI subsection 212Q (Vora 1993). Also occurs in several locations
in the Upper Peninsula of MI, and in northeastern WI (212Te) and is
associated with the upper Mississippi and St. Croix Rivers in MN and WI
(Comer 1996). There are scattered cases in WI\'s Northern Forest (212X).

Biophysical Site Description

Jack pine and red pine-jack pine (-hardwood) forests are endemic to very
dry, nutrient-impoverished landscape ecosystems. These ecosystems occur
in landforms deposited by high-energy glacial melt waters, principally
outwash plains and glacial lakebeds, underlain by well-sorted,
coarse-textured sandy soils with low water retaining capacity. They also
occur in bedrock-controlled landforms with shallow soils of limited
moisture storage capacity, and on sand ridges within peatland complexes
(Cohen et al. 2002; Cleland et al. 2004). They are generally found in
cooler climates north of the tension zone. The topography is flat to
gently rolling, typically with long expanses capable of carrying
wildfires with few natural fire breaks, and often in proximity to even
more fire-prone pine barrens. The soils of this community are sandy,
acidic, droughty and relatively infertile (Comer 1996). Where the system
occurs on low sand ridges in peatland complexes, the higher water table
promotes paludification, which results in accumulation of an organic
horizon above the mineral layers. They become established in areas with
continental climate, in which summers are typically short and warm to
cool, and winters are cold (Pregitzer and Saunders 1999).

Vegetation Description

Pinus banksiana (jack pine) typically dominates the overstory canopy.
Pinus resinosa (red pine) dominates some stands and may form a scattered
supercanopy in stands otherwise dominated by jack pine. Most of these
trees were likely removed during the logging era. Quercus ellipsoidalis
(northern pin oak) is also locally important. Canopy associates include
Acer rubrum (red maple), Betula papyrifera (paper or white birch), Pinus
strobus (white pine, which occasionally occurs in the supercanopy),
Populus grandidentata (bigtooth aspen), Populus tremuloides (trembling
aspen), Prunus serotina (black cherry) and Quercus rubra (red oak)
(Cohen 2002). Picea mariana (black spruce) may also occur, particularly
where the system occurs on dune ridges within peatlands. Many former
areas of jack pine and red pine forests succeeded to open "stump
prairies" or scrubby forests of Populus grandidentata (bigtooth aspen),
P. tremuloides (quaking aspen), Betula papyrifera (paper birch), and
Prunus serotina (black cherry) following widespread logging and slash
fires in the mid-1800s to early 1900s (Cohen 2002; Epstein et al. 2002).
Vaccinium angustifolium (low sweet blueberry), V. myrtilloides (Canada
blueberry), and Gaylussacia baccata (huckleberry) are common low shrubs;
characteristic dwarf shrubs include Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry),
Chimaphila umbellata (pipsissewa), Cornus canadensis (bunchberry),
Epigaea repens (trailing-arbutus), and Gaultheria procumbens
(wintergreen) (Epstein et al. 2002; MNDNR 2003; Cohen et al. 2015). In
openings, Comptonia peregrina (sweet-fern), Prunus pumila (sand cherry),
Salix humilis (prairie willow) and Corylus spp. (hazelnuts) may be
present. On paludified sand ridges, species typical of peatlands, such
as Chamaedaphne calyculata (leatherleaf) and Rhododendron groenlandicum
(Labrador-tea) may proliferate. Characteristic herbaceous species
include Pteridium aquilinum (bracken fern), Avenella flexuosa (wiry hair
grass), Danthonia spicata (poverty grass), Carex pensylvanica
(Pennsylvania sedge), Aralia nudicaulis (sarsaparilla), Maianthemum
canadense (Canada mayflower), Trientalis borealis (starflower),
Mitchella repens (partridge-berry), Apocynum androsaemifolium (spreading
dogbane), Eurybia macrophylla (large-leaved aster), Melampyrum lineare
(cow-wheat), Linnaea borealis (twinflower), Oryzopsis asperifolia
(rough-leaved rice-grass), and Piptatheropsis pungens (rice-grass)
(Cohen 2002; Epstein et al. 2002; MNDNR 2003; Cohen et al. 2015). Mosses
(e.g., Dicranum spp. and Pleurozium schreberi) and lichens (e.g.,
Cladina and Cladonia spp.) often form a mat on the soil (Cohen 2002).

At Crex Meadows in western WI, Vogl (1961) studied pine barrens as
described by original land survey records. He estimated that there were
20 trees greater than 15cm (6in) in diameter per hectare. This
translates to an average distance between trees of 24m (65ft). The trees
in this community had typical open-grown shapes. They had branches most
of the way down their trunks with many needles. Many burned jack pine
snags were encountered by land surveyors in Michigan. Zimmerman (1956)
reported that the tallest tree in his 50 study sites was 16m (52ft). The
average tree height was only 8m (26ft). This may be misleading because
past logging may have eliminated the largest trees and there has not
been enough time to regenerate the tallest pines. Vogl (1961), in his
analysis of General Land Office surveys conducted in western WI, found
that the average diameter of Pinus banksiana was 25cm (10in) and of P.
resinosa was 50cm (20in). This indicates that taller trees may have
existed before logging and the subsequent slash-fires that swept through
most barrens.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  PIBA2        *Pinus banksiana*                Jack pine

  CAPE6        *Carex pensylvanica*             Pennsylvania sedge

  QUEL         *Quercus ellipsoidalis*          Northern pin oak

  GAPR2        *Gaultheria procumbens*          Eastern teaberry

  VAAN         *Vaccinium angustifolium*        Lowbush blueberry

  DEFLF        *Deschampsia (Avenella)          Wiry hair grass
               flexuosa*                        

  PIRE         *Pinus resinosa*                 Red pine

  ARUV         *Arctostaphylos uva-ursi*        Kinnikinnick
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Frequent fire and, in some places, frost and drought conditions,
maintain open canopy conditions by limiting the development of woody
vegetation and allowing the maintenance of a mixture of grasses and
sedges. Pine barrens were found in the most fire-prone and driest areas
of the landscape, often west of natural fire breaks. Barrens typically
occur within long expanses capable of carrying wildfires with few
natural fire breaks. In rolling topography, pine barrens are found in
depressions that collect cold air, forming frost pockets (Comer 1996).

Fire return intervals for stands in Minnesota are estimated at 30-50
years for moderate surface fires to 120-170 years for catastrophic fires
(MNDNR 2003).

There are numerous estimates of fire return interval for upland jack
pine systems depending on scale and geographic location of study.
Whitney (1986) estimated average return time for canopy replacement fire
in jack pine forests of northern lower MI to be about 80yrs. Similar
return times (50-100yrs) have been estimated by Heinselman (1981) in MN.
Whitney (1986) also estimated that surface fires occurred every 25yrs,
while Heinselman (1981) suggested that on drier sites light to moderate
surface fires may have occurred every 20-40yrs. Simard & Blank (1982)
calculated presettlement fire frequency in the Mack Lake area of Oscoda
County, MI to have averaged in the range of 13-41yrs. Historical reports
document near-annual fires in barrens (Curtis 1959). In a synthesis of
the fire literature for historic fire return intervals for the Great
Lakes Region Dickman and Cleland (2002) report that the fire return
interval for jack pine barrens ranged from 15-60yrs and fires may have
even occurred on an annual basis. It is likely that the frequency of
fires depended in part to indigenous burning.

Insect infestations in jack pine are also an important disturbance
factor, often followed by canopy fire. Currently, jack pine budworm
infestations can lead to stand-level mortality, but it is unclear how
the insect behaved in presettlement. GLO data indicate that fire and
windthrow were important in some barrens landscapes (Comer et al. 1995,
Corner and Albert 1999). This system falls within Fire Regimes I and II.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

This is matrix system that included prairie/barrens, savanna, and closed
canopy forests. The patterning of these patch types was influenced by
variation in the size, intensity and frequency of fires. Fire size,
frequency and intensity was dependent on natural features, soil types,
topography, climatic factors and the concentration of indigenous people.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Jack pine barrens often occurred on extensive areas of outwash plain
intermixed with dry sand prairie and closed-canopy jack pine systems.
The system grades into oak barrens and savannas in the south and into
northern pine (oak) forests along to the north. It may be confused with
Laurentian Pine-Oak Barrens (BpS 1407).

Many areas that once supported pine barrens and closed jack pine forests
have been planted to red pine plantations. Also, current logging
practices, clear cutting of jack pine without fire or reforestation
practices, these sites have converted to aspen and birch stands.

Other classifications: Michigan Natural Features Inventory (MNFI)
natural community classification: dry northern forest. The Nature
Conservancy National Classification: CODE: (III.A.4a.SW20.00).
International Vegetation Classification (IVC) Alliance: Pinus
banksiana - Pinus resinosa - Quercus ellipsoidalis Forest & Woodland
Alliance; Pinus banksiana - Pinus resinosa / Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
Sand Woodland Alliance. Association: Pinus banksiana - (Pinus
resinosa) - Quercus ellipsoidalis / Carex pensylvanica Forest; Pinus
banksiana / Vaccinium spp. / Pleurozium schreberi Woodland; Pinus
banksiana - Pinus resinosa - Pinus strobus Dune Forest; Pinus
banksiana - (Pinus resinosa) / Corylus cornuta Forest; Pinus banksiana -
Picea mariana / Vaccinium spp. / Pleurozium schreberi Forest. Kotar
habitat type Group 1.

Issues or Problems

Need to acquire more detailed information about distribution of pine
barrens in MN. Need more research on frequency of historical surface
fire. This model constitutes all jack pine dominated systems in MZ50. We
incorporated dry sand prairie, jack pine barrens and jack pine forest
into one model with each vegetation type representing a seral stage in
the model. The amount of the landscape in each of these seral stages
(dry sand prairie, jack pine barrens and jack pine forest) depended on
temporal and spatial scales and was closely linked with fire return
intervals. This differs from how the modelers in MZ51 (MI) chose to
model jack pine systems. In MZ51 there are separate models for jack pine
forests and jack pine barrens.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

Prior to LANDFIRE Remap this BpS was named Laurentian-Acadian Jack Pine
Barrens and Forest.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 14 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                             Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- ------------------- -----------------
  CAPE6        Carex pensylvanica        Pennsylvania sedge  Lower

  SCSC         Schizachyrium scoparium   Little bluestem     Lower

  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana           Jack pine           Lower

  VAAN         Vaccinium angustifolium   Lowbush blueberry   Lower
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Sedges and grasses are dominant, with scattered jack pine/pine
regeneration and low shrubs.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. Grasses and sedges
are dominant lifeforms. Typically, herbaceous species are less than a
meter in height. Minimum cover for herbaceous species is approximately
40% while maximum coverage is 90%.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 23 Mid Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- -------------------- ------------------
  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana        Jack pine            Low-Mid

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa         Red pine             Low-Mid

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis  Northern pin oak     Low-Mid

  CAPE6        Carex pensylvanica     Pennsylvania sedge   Lower
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Dominated by jack pine regeneration (seedlings or saplings), with
scattered red pine and northern pin oak, isolated cases of birch and
aspen. A patchwork of clumps of regenerating trees with areas of grass.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. The upper layer
lifeform varies depending on the spatial scale. Jack pine and other
trees form clumps interspersed within a matrix of grasses and sedges.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\"DBH

Class C 49 Late Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                            Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------- -----------------
  CAPE6        Carex pensylvanica       Pennsylvania sedge  Lower

  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana          Jack pine           Upper

  VAAN         Vaccinium angustifolium  Lowbush blueberry   Lower

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis    Northern pin oak    Middle
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Sedges and grasses are dominant, with scattered jack, red, and white
pine trees and low shrubs.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. The upper layer
lifeform varies on spatial scales in some areas grasses and sedges are
dominant lifeform. Typically, herbaceous species are less than a meter
in height. Minimum cover for herbaceous species is approximately 40%,
while maximum coverage is 70%. In other areas the dominant life will be
jack pine growing in patches.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 14 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana          Jack pine          Upper

  QUEL         Quercus ellipsoidalis    Northern pin oak   Mid-Upper

  GAPR2        Gaultheria procumbens    Eastern teaberry   Lower

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa           Red pine           Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Closed-canopy jack pine forest that results after prolonged periods
(25yrs) of fire suppression or microtopography that protects forest from
fires.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: Optional 1 (wind followed by fire)

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Dickman, D.I. and D.T. Cleland. 2002 Draft. Fire Return Intervals and
Fire Cycles for Historic Fire Regimes in the Great Lakes Region: A
Synthesis of the Literature. Draft manuscript. 20 pp.

Comer, P.J. 1996. Natural community abstract for pine barrens. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 3 pp.

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A. Corner and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan\'s
Presettlement Vegetation, as Interpreted from the General Land Office
Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI.
Digital map.

Corner, R.A. and D.A. Albert. 1999. Landtype associations of the high
plains: subsection VII.2. Prepared for the Northern Lower Michigan
Ecosystem Management Project. Michigan Natural Features Inventory report
number 1999-03. 177 pp. plus maps.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. U. of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Dickmann, Donald and David Cleland. (2002). Fire Return Intervals and
Fire Cycles for Historic Fire Regimes in the Great Lakes Region: A
Synthesis of the Literature.
http://www.ncrs.fs.fed.us/gla/natdist/purpose.htm.

Heinselman, M.L. 1981. Fire intensity and frequency as factors in the
distribution and structure of northern ecosystems. In: Mooney, H., J.M.
Bonnicksen, N.L. Christensen, J.E. Lotan and W.A. Reiners, eds. Fire
regimes and ecosystem properties. General Technical Report WO-26, USDA
Forest Service, Washington, DC: 7-57.

Kotar, John; Kovach A. Joseph, Burger L. Timothy. 2002. A Guide to
Forest Communities and Habitat Types of Northern Wisconsin. University
of Wisconsin. 136 pp.

Pregitzer, K.S. and S.C. Saunders. 1999. Jack pine barrens of the
northern Great Lakes region. In: Anderson, R.C., J.S. Fralish and J.M.
Baskin, eds. Savannas, Barrens, and Rock Outcrop Plant Communities of
North America. Cambridge, UK: 343-361.

Simard, A.J. and R.W. Blank. 1982. Fire history of a Michigan jack pine
forest. Mich. Acad. 15: 59-71.

Vogl, R.J. 1967. Fire and the northern Wisconsin pine barrens.
Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference. 10: 175-209.

Vora, R.S. 1993. Moquah barrens: Pine barrens restoration experiment
initiated in Chequamegon National Forest. Restor. and Mgmt. Notes.
11(1): 39-44.

Whitney, G.G. 1986. Relation of Michigan\'s presettlement pine forests
to substrate and disturbance history. Ecology. 67(6): 1548-1559.

Zimmerman, D.A. 1956. The jack pine association in the Lower Peninsula
of Michigan: Its structure and composition. PhD thesis. U. of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI.
