# 14110 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Great Lakes Wet-Mesic Lakeplain Prairie {#great-lakes-wet-mesic-lakeplain-prairie .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 4/13/2018

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                             **Reviewers**   
  -------------- ------------------------- --------------- ---------------------------
  Brad Slaughter slaughterb@michigan.gov   Jim Drake       jim_drake@natureserve.org

  None           None                      None            None

  None           None                      None            None
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Mixed Upland and Wetland

Map Zones

49, 51, 52

Geographic Range

Lakeplain wet-mesic prairies occur along the glacial lakeplains of the
Great Lakes, in southeastern Wisconsin, northeastern Illinois, northern
Indiana, southern Michigan and northwestern Ohio, as well as in southern
Ontario, Canada. In map zones 49 and 52, this Biophysical Setting was
concentrated in the lakeplain portion of the Central Corn Belt Plains
Level III Ecoregion (54), particularly in the Chicago Lake Plain and
Chiwaukee Prairie Region Level IV Ecoregions (Woods et al. 1998, 2006).

Biophysical Site Description

Lakeplain wet-mesic prairie is most commonly associated with inland
portions of Michigan's lakeplains, but is also found along low beach
ridges near the present Saginaw Bay shoreline. More specifically,
lakeplain wet-mesic prairie occurs on several glacial features of the
lakeplain, including level, sandy outwash, sandy lakeplains, and
deposits of dune sand on silt or clay glacial lakeplains. The soils are
sands, sandy loams, loams, or silty clays with poor to moderate
water-retaining capacity. Lakeplain prairies most commonly occur on sand
lakeplain with soils of medium to fine-textured sands that are slightly
acid to moderately alkaline (pH6-8). The prairies, which experience
seasonal flooding and typically include small pockets that remain wet
throughout the year, are among the most diverse plant communities in
Michigan, with as many as 200 plant species found within a single
prairie remnant.

Vegetation Description

The dominant tallgrass prairie species of this community typically grow
1-2m high. Trees and shrubs are uncommon and bare ground is scarce.
*Andropogon gerardii* (big bluestem), *Carex* (sedge) spp., *Panicum
virgatum* (switch grass), *Schizachyrium scoparius* (little bluestem)
and Sorghastrum nutans *(Indian grass) are the most abundant species.
Solidago ohioensis (Ohio goldenrod*) is found in both fens and Great
Lakes interdunal wetlands as well as this community. *Pycnanthemum
virginianum* (common mountain mint) is common in this community but may
also occur in woodlands. In addition to the species listed above, other
diagnostic species include: *Pedicularis lanceolata* (swamp-betony),
*Solidago riddellii* (Riddell's goldenrod) and *Vernonia* (ironweed)
spp. *Sorghastrum nutans, Liatris spicata* (marsh blazing star),
*Aletris farinosa* (colic root) and *Coreopsis tripteris* (tall
coreopsis) are good indicators of functioning lakeplain wet-mesic
prairie.

Rare plants associated with lakeplain wet-mesic prairie include:
*Agalinis gattingeri* (Gattinger's gerardia), *Agalinis skinneriana*
(Skinner's gerardia), *Angelica venenosa* (hairy angelica), *Aristida
longispica* (three-awned grass), *Asclepias hirtella* (tall green
milkweed), *A. sullivantii* (Sullivant's milkweed), *Astragalus
neglectus* (Cooper's milk-vetch), *Baptisia leucophaea* (creamy wild
indigo), *Cacalia plantaginea* (prairie Indian-plantain), *Carex
festucacea* (fescue sedge), *Conobea multifida* (conobea), *Cyperus
flavescens* (yellow nut-grass), *Cypripedium candidum* (white
lady's-slipper), *Fimbristylis puberula* (chestnut sedge), *Hemicarpha
micrantha* (dwarf-bulrush), *Hypericum gentianoides* (gentian-leaved St.
John's-wort), *Juncus biflorus* (two-flowered rush), *Juncus
brachycarpus* (short-fruited rush), *Lechea minor* (least pinweed),
*Ludwigia alternifolia* (seedbox), *Lycopodium appressum* (appressed bog
clubmoss), *Panicum leibergii* (Leiberg's panic-grass), *Platanthera
ciliaris* (yellow fringed orchid), *Platanthera leucophaea* (prairie
fringed orchid), *Polygala cruciata* (cross-leaved milkwort),
*Pycnanthemum verticillatum* (whorled mountain-mint), *Rotala ramosior*
(tooth-cup), *Scirpus clintonii* (Clinton's bulrush), *Scleria
pauciflora* (few-flowered nut-rush), *Scleria triglomerata* (tall
nut-rush), *Tradescantia virginiana* (Virginia spiderwort) and
*Triplasis purpurea* (sand grass).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  SCHIZ4       *Schizachyrium*                  Little bluestem

  ANGE         *Andropogon gerardii*            Big bluestem

  PAVI2        *Panicum virgatum*               Switchgrass

  SONU2        *Sorghastrum nutans*             Indiangrass

  PYVI         *Pycnanthemum virginianum*       Virginia mountainmint

  LISP         *Liatris spicata*                Dense blazing star

  OLOH         *Oligoneuron ohioense*           Ohio goldenrod

  PELA2        *Pedicularis lanceolata*         Swamp lousewort
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Many factors influence the development and maintenance of prairies on
post-glacial lakeplain. Hubbard (1888) speculated that the extensive wet
prairies of Wayne and Monroe Counties in Michigan were the result of
beaver activity prior to their localized extirpation by the fur trade.
His view was based on communications with Native Americans and the
prevalence of abandoned beaver dams on the flat lakeplain landscape.
Other important factors probably include both soil moisture regimes and
periodic wildfires. The combination of 1-3m of highly permeable sand
over clay sets up a characteristic hydrological regime with spring
flooding followed by drought conditions during the growing season. This
characteristic water level fluctuation is common to nearly all extant
examples of lakeplain prairies in the region, and is possibly the most
significant physical process in their establishment and maintenance
(Minc 1995, Albert et al. 1996). Such extreme variation in the soil
moisture regime prevents woody vegetation from becoming established
(Hayes 1964, Roberts et al. 1977). In addition to the dramatic seasonal
fluctuations in surface and ground water levels, Great Lakes water level
cycles also produce fluctuations in the water table of these prairies.
Wet prairies originally occupied the position on the landscape between
emergent marsh and adjacent uplands. Based on the original surveyors'
notes from the Saginaw Bay shoreline in Michigan, the boundary between
prairie and marsh was not static, but moved inland or lakeward across
the landscape, depending on the stage of the Great Lakes water-level
cycle. Lakeplain prairies isolated from the current Great Lakes
shorelines, such as those in the Oak Openings region of Ohio, are not
subject to direct flooding by Lake Erie. However, fluctuating hydrology
remains a significant factor shaping temporal vegetative composition and
structure.

The combination of accumulation of organic material within these
wetlands and drought conditions during the growing season made lakeplain
prairies prone to wildfires, which limited the encroachment of woody
vegetation. However, it remains unclear whether lighting strikes or
Native American activities had a more significant role in the
maintenance of lakeplain prairie (Hayes 1964, Faber-Langendoen & Maycock
1987). It is clear, however, that Native Americans utilized dune ridges
on the lakeplain for settlements and trails (Jones & Knapp 1972, Comer
et al. 1995a). One indication of the significance of fire on the
lakeplain is the fact that many of the historical oak savannas located
along the beach ridges have become closed-canopy oak forests during the
last century of fire suppression.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Patch size characteristics for this community are variable. Circa 1800
patch sizes of lakeplain prairie mosaics (including wet, wet-mesic, and
mesic sand prairies) in Michigan varied from \<100ac to more than
15,000ac (40-6000ha) (Comer et al. 1995b).

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Historically, these prairies occurred in complex mosaics with lakeplain
oak openings, pin oak-swamp white oak sand flatwoods, and elm-ash-maple
swamps, all typical of poorly drained lakeplain. At the base of old
beach ridges, lakeplain wet-mesic prairie presently occurs as a
transition zone between lakeplain wet-prairie and lakeplain mesic
prairie (Comer et al. 1995a).

Lakeplain prairies have been lost and degraded via conversion to
agriculture, residential and industrial development, alterations of
ground water hydrology, and fire suppression. The construction of
extensive drainage networks to promote agriculture and residential
development has lowered the water table in most of the historical range
of lakeplain prairies. That, and the suppression of natural and cultural
fires has allowed the community to succeed to shrub and forest
communities. Also, alteration of natural hydrologic and fire regimes has
allowed invasives species to invade lakeplain prairie remnants.
Significant invasive species found in lakeplain wet-mesic prairies
include *Phragmites australis, Phalaris arundiancea,* and *Lythrum
salicaria*. Of nearly 160,000ac (64,000ha) of lakeplain prairie in
Michigan circa 1800, \< 0.5% remain today (Comer et al. 1995a and b).

Issues or Problems

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 46 Early Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- ----------------- -----------------
  TYLA         Typha latifolia           Broadleaf cattail Low-Mid

  CAREX        Carex                     Sedge             Lower

  SPPE         Spartina pectinata        Prairie cordgrass Low-Mid

  CACA4        Calamagrostis canadensis  Bluejoint         Low-Mid
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Emergent marsh/lakeplain wet-prairie class: This stage is dominated by
species such as *Calamagrostis canadensis, Spartina pectinata, Juncus
balticus, Carex stricta, Carex aquatilis, Carex pellita, Cladium
mariscoides, Potentilla fruiticosa* and *Asclepias incarnata* (swamp
milkweed). Wetter portions would contain *Alisma plantago-aquatica,
Carex, Eleocharis, Glyceria borealis, Leersia, Lemna, Nuphar, Nymphaea,
Polygonum, Pontederia cordata, Sagittaria, Scirpus, Sparganium,
Spirodela, Typha, Wolffia*, and *Zizania aquatica*.

This stage would occur with fluctuating Great Lakes water levels. When
Great Lakes water levels rise, areas of wet-mesic prairie (class B) near
the Great Lakes would be inundated and species mix would shift to wet
prairie and marsh species (class A). This probability is an estimate and
large-scale (interannual) fluctuations in Great Lakes water levels are
stochastic events and occur without regular periodicity. In the absence
of disturbance class A would remain as class A.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 27 Early Development 2 - Open

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                              Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- -------------------- ---------------
  SCHIZ4       Schizachyrium             Little bluestem      Low-Mid

  SONU2        Sorghastrum nutans        Indiangrass          Low-Mid

  PYVI         Pycnanthemum virginianum  Virginia             Lower
                                         mountainmint         

  LISP         Liatris spicata           Dense blazing star   Lower
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Lakeplain wet-mesic prairie class. The stage can exist for decades, but
lakeplain wet-mesic prairie systems can persist on the landscape for
longer than 100yrs as long as fire and hydrologic regimes remain
unaltered. This stage is dominated by *Schizachyrium scoparium,
Sorghastrum nutans, Panicum virgatum*, and *Andropogon geradii* with
forbs such as *Pycnanthemum virginianum, Solidgao ohioensis, Liatris
spicata, Pedicularis lanceolata, Solidago riddellii, Vernonia* spp., and
*Coreopsis tripteris*.

The poor to moderately drained soils of the lakeplain supports a
moisture regime of spring flooding followed by summer drought. These
edaphic factors maintain lakeplain prairie species and limits the
encroachment of woody vegetation. In addition to abiotic and edaphic
factors, fire also maintains the system in this class. Replacement fire
was included, and the frequency of fires would have depended in large
part on the concentration of Native Americans in the region.

For lakeplain wet-mesic prairies that occur near the Great Lakes, rises
in Great Lakes water levels can send the system back to class A, a
wet-prairie or marsh. This was modeled as \"Optional 2\". Again, this
probability is an estimate and large-scale (interannual) fluctuations in
Great Lakes water levels are stochastic events and occur with no regular
periodicity.

With time and the absence of fires, trees and shrubs would establish and
the system would transition to a lakeplain oak savanna/ oak woodland.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class C 27 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------ -----------------
  QUBI         Quercus bicolor          Swamp white oak    Low-Mid

  QUPA2        Quercus palustris        Pin oak            Low-Mid

  ULAM         Ulmus americana          American elm       Lower

  FRQU         Fraxinus quadrangulata   Blue ash           Lower
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Lakeplain oak savanna/oak woodland would include *Quercus palustris, Q.
bicolor, Ulmus americana,* and *Fraxinus quadrangulata*. This stage
would result when trees encroach and establish in areas of lakeplain
wet-mesic prairie. This would occur when frequent prairie fires are
absent. Infrequent replacement fires would take the system back to the
wet-mesic prairie stage. It is assumed that an area capable of
supporting lakeplain oak savanna/woodland is far enough inland to no
longer be affected by changes in Great Lakes water levels.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: Rise in Great Lakes Water Levels

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Albert, D.A. and M.A. Kost 1998. Natural community abstract for
lakeplain wet-mesic prairie. Michigan Natural Features Inventory,
Lansing, MI. 5 pp.

Anderson, D. 1981. Ohio plant community classification and survey. Ohio
Department of Natural Resources Division of Natural Areas and Preserves
Natural Heritage Program, Columbus, Ohio.

Brewer, L.C. and J.L. Vankat. 2004. Description of vegetation of the Oak
Openings of northwestern Ohio at the time of Euro-American settlement.
Ohio Journal of Science 104: 76-85.

NatureServe. 2007. NatureServe Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life
\[web application\]. Version 4.7. NatureServe, Arlington, VA. 14
December 2007 http: // www.natureserve.org/explorer.

Omernik, J.M., S.S. Chapman, R.A. Lillie, and R.T. Dumke. 2000.
Ecoregions of Wisconsin. Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of
Science, Arts and Letters 88(2000): 77-103.

White, J. and M.H. Madany. 1978. Classification of natural communities
in Illinois. Appendix 30 in: Illinois Natural Areas Inventory- Technical
report by The Department of Landscape Architecture, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign & The Natural Land Institute, Rockford, IL.

Woods, A.J., J.M. Omernik, C.S. Brockman, T.D. Gerber, W.D. Hosteter and
S.H. Azevedo. 1998. Ecoregions of Indiana and Ohio (2-sided color poster
with map, descriptive text, summary tables, and photographs): Reston,
Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey, scale 1: 500,000.

Woods, A.J., J.M. Omernik, C.L. Pederson, and B.C. Moran. 2006.
Ecoregions of Illinois (2-sided color poster with map, descriptive text,
summary tables, and photographs): Reston, Virginia, U.S. Geological
Survey, scale 1: 500,000.

References Cited in Michigan Natural Features Inventory Abstract:

Albert, D.A. 1995. Regional landscape ecosystems of Michigan, Minnesota,
and Wisconsin: a working map and classification. North Central Forest
Experiment Station. Forest Service - U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Albert, D.A., D.L. Cuthrell, D.A. Hyde, J.T. Legge, M.R. Penskar, and
M.L. Rabe. 1996. Sampling and management of lakeplain prairies in
southern Lower Michigan. Michigan Natural Features Inventory. 93 pp.

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A. Corner, and D.W. Schuen. 1995a. Michigan's
presettlement vegetation, as interpreted from the General Land Office
Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 76
pp.

Comer, J.P., W.A. MacKinnon, M.L. Rabe, D.L. Cuthrell, M.R. Penskar, and
D.A. Albert. 1995b. A survey of lakeplain prairie in Michigan. Michigan
Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 232 pp.

Faber-Langendoen, D. and P.F. Maycock. 1987. Composition and
soil-environment analysis of prairies on Walpole Island, southwestern
Ontario. Canadian Journal of Botany 65: 2410-2419.

Jones, C.L. and R.O. Kapp. 1972. Relationship of Bay County Michigan
presettlement forest patterns to Indian cultures. The Michigan
Academician, pp. 17-28.

Hayes, B.N. 1964. An ecological study of wet prairie on Harsons Island,
Michigan. The Michigan Botanist 3: 71-82.

Hubbard, B. 1888. Memorials of a half-century in Michigan and the Lake
Region. G. P. Putnam's Sons. Pp. 360-367.

Minc, L.D. 1995. Seasonal hydrology and species relationships in Lower
Michigan's lakeplain prairies. An analysis and report submitted to
Michigan Natural Features Inventory. 89 pp.

Roberts, T.M., T. Robson, and P.J. Catling. 1977. Factors maintaining a
disjunct community of Liatris spicata and other prairie species in
Ontario, Canada. Canadian Journal of Botany 55: 593-605.
