**14120**

# North-Central Interior Sand and Gravel Tallgrass Prairie {#north-central-interior-sand-and-gravel-tallgrass-prairie .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 5/10/2018

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                                       **Reviewers**                                  
  ---------------- --------------------------------- --------------- ------------------------------ --
  John Harrington  jaharrin@wisc.edu                 Doug Cox        <mteecology@frontiernet.net>   

                                                     Robert Dana     robert.dana@dnr.state.mn.us    

                                                     Gary Willson    gwillson2@unlnotes.unl.edu     

                                                     Jim Drake       jim_drake@natureserve.org      

  Richard          Richard.Henderson@wisconsin.gov   Mike Kost       <kostma@michigan.gov>          
  Henderson                                                                                         

  None             None                              Becky Schillo   <SchilloR@michigan.gov>        
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Herbaceous

Map Zones

39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 50, 51

Geographic Range

This biophysical setting (BpS) would have occurred in
Sections/Subsections (Cleland et al. 2007) 222L (all-highest
concentration would have been in this section), 222K(all), 222R(all),
251Ba and 222M (all). Largest expanse (11-13 million ha) of this type is
found across central midwestern states with typical prairie border
forests and prairie peninsula region of eastern states Iowa, Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky and Ohio.

In map zones (MZ)s 39 and 40, this would be in the eastern portion. It
would occur in ECOMAP sections 222M, 222N, 251A and 251B.

Biophysical Site Description

Within the area of the prairie border forests (Abrams 1992), prairie
vegetation dominated the landscape with oak-hickory forests existing
within fire-protected ravines or along stream corridors forming gallery
forests (Abrams 1992). Our model abstracts prairie types to include
xeric and dry-mesic types (Curtis 1959). Xeric prairies were maintained
by shallow soils (less than four inches) on steep slopes (usually to the
southwest) with extreme runoff of rainwater. Xeric prairies may also
have occurred on flat uplands where soil is shallow and has low water
holding capacity. In general, these prairie types are found in both
glaciated and non-glaciated areas. They are excessively to well drained,
with shallow depth to bedrock or sandy soils. Fertility ranges from poor
acidic to richer neutral soils limited by moisture. Thin loess over
bedrock is prevalent in this type in Wisconsin. This type is most
prevalent in driftless areas with sharper topography but also occurs in
glaciated areas among glacial till and outwash and well-drained sand and
gravel deposits. Level sites occurred on glacial outwash with a very
porous subsoil of sand and gravel. Rolling areas were characterized by
glacial till of recessional moraines or on residual loess soils. While
the region is strongly influenced by dry continental air flow patterns
and periodic drought, historic fire frequency determined the
prairie-forest boundary with much variation based on topography, fuel
breaks, ignition sources, and climate (Whitney 1994, Anderson and Bowles
1999). Over time, forest edges expanded and contracted based on
topographic variability and fire frequency and intensity exhibiting a
continuum of grassland, "grub" (from the German *gruben*, to dig), open
savanna woodlands or canopied forests. Much has been written concerning
these systems and excellent reviews can be found in Curtis (1959),
Whitney (1994) and Anderson, and Fralish and Baskin (1999).

Vegetation Description

Grasses formed the matrix of this prairie system with sideoats grama
(*Bouteloua curtipendula*) and little bluestem (*Schizachyrium
scoparium*) being the main indicator species. Big bluestem (*Andropogon
gerardii*), Indian grass (*Sorghastrum nutans*), needlegrass
(*Hesperostipa spartea*) and prairie dropseed (*Sporobolus
heterolepsis*) also dominate many dry to dry-mesic prairies (Whitney
1994). Numerous forbs such as composites\--*Aster* spp., *Silphium*
spp., blazingstars (*Liatris* spp.) and coneflower (*Echinaceas
pallida*); legumes\--prairie clovers (*Petalostemum* spp.), roundheaded
bushclover (*Lespedeza capitata*); and leadplant (*Amorpha canescens*)
among many others, were also present. Fuel complexes consisted of short-
or tall-grass prairie forbs and shrubs with little or no tree
regeneration.

Oak grubs and shrubs characterize that portion of this vegetation
sequence that experienced recurring fires in advanced oak regeneration,
which stimulates the resprouting response evidenced by the \"grubs,\" or
multi-stemmed stump sprouts of black oak (*Q. velutina*), bur oak (*Q.
macrocarpa*), white oak (*Q. alba*) and others (Abrams 1992). Shrub
species include New Jersey tea (*Ceanothus americanus*), hazelnut
(*Coylus americana*), gray dogwood (*Cornus racemosa*) and sumac (*Rhus*
spp.). Over a period of years, massive root systems developed, and the
term \"grub\" referenced the laborious method of removing these root
wads in clearing areas for planting (Anderson and Bowles 1999). Fuel
complexes were characterized as "stunted brush prairie" comprised of
mixed prairie grasses and forbs with coppicing oak stems about 1.0-1.5m
in height (Curtis 1959, Anderson and Bowles 1999).

Savannas and woodlands represent relatively open forest systems along
the prairie-forest continuum (for extreme variety see Anderson et al.
1999). Generally, these systems have a mix of species from true open
prairies, woodlands and closed canopy forests, with oak species
dominating the arboreal layer (Abrams 1992). For the purposes of Fire
Regime Condition Class we have adopted fairly average canopy closure
values of 0-10% closure for prairie, 10-25% closure to indicate savanna,
while woodlands exhibit 25-60% canopy closure (see discussion in
Anderson and Bowles 1999 for variation across range).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  SCSC         *Schizachyrium scoparium*        Little bluestem

  SONU2        *Sorghastrum nutans*             Indiangrass

  BOCU         *Bouteloua curtipendula*         Sideoats grama

  HESP11       *Hesperostipa spartea*           Porcupinegrass

  ANGE         *Andropogon gerardii*            Big bluestem
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Frequent fires impacted this prairie system every 1-5yrs, maintaining
grass and forb vegetation. Insect and small mammal herbivory impacts
composition and dominance (Howe et al 2006). Large mammals were present
in low densities, main grazers were elk and deer with impacts likely
being minimal.

Shrub and tree establishment and longevity was influenced by fire
intensity and return interval.

Fire intensity will be influenced by topography, weather, productivity
and aspect. For example, productive soils on level terrains supported
more intensive fires and the areas with fire breaks or leeward
sides/north-facing slopes generally supported more savanna types. Fire
intensity varied based on humidity and temperature. Fire intensity also
varies with aspect and slope. For example south and west facing steep
slopes would have burned at a higher intensity resulting in few trees
and shrubs.

Oak wilt occurred on sand prairies and likely resulted in mortality of
larger oak groups, especially when they occurred in high densities. This
was not modeled due to the general lack of larger oak groups in this
BpS.

Diseases and insects can impact species composition. However, specific
impacts are not clearly understood and therefore not modeled.

Within the western ranges of this type in western Wisconsin and
Minnesota, and the eastern Dakotas, there was a grazing and fire
interaction. This was probably minimal in the MZs 41, 50 and 51, since
those are more eastern. As one moves east in this region fire increases
to where it is the major disturbance factor for this type and grazing
drops out as an influence.

Proximity of seed source is important to probability of shrub and tree
invasion. Proximity is related to isolation of trees and shrubs. Less
edge equals lower probability of tree or shrub invasion.

Health and vigor of the sod influences shrub or tree invasion. Better
health of sod reduces probability of successful establishment of trees
and shrubs.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Within regions of varied topography, type patches are typically small
(\<200ac) limited by topography, but in regions of level topography on
extensive sands and gravel deposits these could be much larger.

In the Great Plains, this would be a small or medium patch community on
the floodplains or sandplains.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

North-Central Interior Oak Savanna, North-Central Oak Barrens, Central
Tallgrass Prairie, and adjacent sedge meadows and wet prairie are the
systems that would be adjacent to this BpS.

Synonymous local classifications include bluff prairie, hill prairie,
sand prairie, limestone prairie and dry prairie.

This BpS might be confused with the Central Tallgrass Prairie systems or
even Northern Tallgrass Prairie in the eastern Great Plains.

In the absence of historic fire, invasive problems have increased
dramatically, including eastern redcedar (*Juniperus virginiana*).
Exotics that have become invasive due to agricultural practices and
roadside plantings include leafy spurge (*Euphorbia esula*), knapweed,
sweet clover (*Melilotus alba*), crown vetch and birds foot trefoil.
Domestic livestock grazing is also an issue.

There are also invasive woody species such as buckthorn, Russian olive,
and salt cedar. These species pose significant threats in tallgrass
prairie.

Today this system has severely reduced native cover (\~99% loss) due to
conversion to other uses such as agriculture. Alteration of the type is
due to grazing and reduced fire resulting in greater shrub and tree
component (eastern redcedar \[*Juniperus virginiana*\] and oak species
\[*Quercus* spp.,\]) and a variety of native and non-native shrubs, and
non-native cool season grasses (brome, bluegrass, quackgrass and redtop)
resulting in reduced diversity.

Currently, there would be much less of class A than there was
historically.

Agriculture on level sand prairie where irrigation will support crops is
a type conversion that might be present today such that the historical
condition is unidentifiable. Invasion of cool season grasses and shrubs
often mask the identification of this type.

Again, species composition and structure was dependent on local factors
such as topography, soil conditions, fire regime, plant competition and
plant-animal interactions (Anderson and Bowles 1999).

Conversion of prairies to cropland and pastures has eliminated much of
this system in MZs 39 and 40.

Issues or Problems

The plant/animal interactions are not fully understood for this model
and numerous studies of these phenomena are ongoing. Research exists for
bison/fire interaction in detail. Also, there is possible overlap with
the North-Central Interior Oak Savanna model. There is variation in oak
species composition across the broad region covered by this model (i.e.,
bur oak \[*Quercus macrocarpa*\] occurs in the western portion of the
range).

This system is at the western edge of its distribution in the northern
Great Plains (MZs 39, 40). Its species distribution in these
grassland-dominated mapzones will be somewhat different than in further
east. Many areas in these map zones have been converted to pasture and
planted with exotic grasses. These conversions make it difficult to
determine the historical vegetation because they are so thorough.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Many small trees and shrubs would be uncharacteristic of this system
historically but occurs today where there are nearby seed sources due to
the lack of fire. Domestic livestock grazing has eliminated many native
species and has altered species composition. Conversion of prairies to
cropland and pastures has eliminated much of this system in MZs 39 and
40.

Comments

The model for MZs 39 and 40 was adapted from the draft model from the
same BpS from MZs 41, 50 and 51 created by John Harrington
jaharrin@wisc.edu and Richard Henderson richard.henderson@wisconsin.gov.
Model for MZs 41, 50 and 51 was reviewed at the Vegetation Modeling
Workshop by Elena Conteras, Randy Swaty, Mike Kost, Chris Weber, Doug
Cox and Becky Schillo.

The model for MZs 41, 50, and 51 was adapted from the Rapid Assessment
model R6BSOH Mosaic of Bluestem Prairie and Oak-Hickory created by C.
Emanuel - cemanuel@tnc.org, S. Hickey - shickey@tnc.org and D. Minney -
dminney@tnc.org.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 80 Early Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**  **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- ---------------- -----------------
  SCSC         Schizachyrium scoparium   Little bluestem  Upper

  SONU2        Sorghastrum nutans        Indiangrass      Upper

  BOCU         Bouteloua curtipendula    Sideoats grama   Upper

  HESP11       Hesperostipa spartea      Porcupinegrass   Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Grasses formed the matrix of the prairie with big bluestem (*Andropogon
gerardii*), Indian grass (*Sorghastrum nutans*), little bluestem
(*Schizachyrium scoparium*), needlegrass (*Hesperostipa spartea*),
prairie dropseed (*Sporobolus heterolepsis*) and sideoats grama
(*Bouteloua curtipendula*) dominating many dry to dry-mesic prairies
(Whitney 1994). Numerous forbs such as composites\--*Aster* spp.,
*Silphium* spp., blazingstars (*Liatris* spp.), and coneflower
(*Echinacea pallida*); legumes\--prairie clovers (*Petalostemum* spp.),
roundheaded bushclover (*Lespedeza capitata*), and leadplant (*Amorpha
canescens*) among many others, were also present. Fuel complexes
consisted of short or tallgrass prairie forbs and shrubs with little or
no tree regeneration.

Replacement fires occur frequently in early successional seral class.
Grass cover in this stage truly should be in the high cover ranges. If
it were lower, it would be a different area/system.

This class would go to next succession class if fire and seed source
were unavailable.

Small mammals and invertebrates and tree pathogens such as oak wilt
probably occurred historically, but unsure of impact, so they were not
modeled.

This A class is the grass type. It was very common historically, but is
not currently.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. Additional species
include prairie dropseed and big bluestem.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 16 Mid Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ----------------
  BOCU         Bouteloua curtipendula   Sideoats grama     Low-Mid

  SCSC         Schizachyrium scoparium  Little bluestem    Middle

  COAM3        Corylus americana        American hazelnut  Upper

  CORA6        Cornus racemosa          Gray dogwood       Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This is the shrub-oak grub representing prairie with scattered shrub and
seedling sprouts or grubs. Quaking aspen and oaks are also present in
the upper canopy, especially in northwest Minnesota. In some areas,
particularly northwestern Minnesota, aspen (*Populus tremuloides*) could
invade along with or instead of oaks. This vegetation is experiencing
recurring fires in advanced oak regeneration, which stimulates the
resprouting grubs. Fuel complexes are characterized as \"stunted brush
prairie\" comprised of mixed prairie grasses and forbs with shrubs and
coppicing oak and/or aspen stems \~1.0-1.5m in height (Curtis 1959;
Anderson and Bowles 1999).

This is the brush-phase that occurs without fire. In an average year,
fire would set back shrub growth but they would resprout. There would
have to be the right conditions of drought and fire to truly set the
system back to class A. Also, it would have to be a very intense
frequent fire to take this class back to A. However, if shrubs are just
starting to come in, it might be easier to get back to A.

Fire frequency in general is the same as class A, but the intensity and
right site conditions is what would transition this stage back to A.

Severe drought cycles, modeled as a wind/weather/stress event, occur
\~30yrs. Therefore, if there is enough fire during drought events, it
might take this stage back to class A (especially if shrubs are in the
beginning stage). If a lower canopy cover, it would go back to A. It\'s
questionable as to whether a filled-up-shrub stage would revert to A; it
might just set back a bit.

It is questionable as to whether this stage is truly part of this system
or whether it\'s transitioned to another type.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. Perennial grasses
dominate this class with \<50% oak/shrub canopy.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Seedling \<4.5ft

Class C 4 Mid Development 2 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ----------------
  BOCU         Bouteloua curtipendula   Sideoats grama     Lower

  COAM3        Corylus americana        American hazelnut  Middle

  QUERC        Quercus                  Oak                Upper

  SCSC         Schizachyrium scoparium  Little bluestem    Low-Mid
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This is a savanna type class, e.g., a \"grown up\" oak shrubland. Aspen
is another indicator in the upper canopy, especially in northwest
Minnesota. This box would rarely occur, and would not revert to prairie
unless a catastrophic, high intensity fire happens, or if extremely
intense fires occur successively. Time of year/seasonality could
influence reverting to class A. That might have occurred, but
infrequently. Replacement fire, modeled with the probability of
occurring every 200yrs, could take the class back to class A. Class C is
more common today, but it was not historically.

Fuel complexes for savanna areas were largely prairie grasses and forbs
in the understory, with widely scattered fire-resistant shrub and oak
stems forming the overstory.

Above 20%, this moves into another system.

Class C would have surface fires because it\'s a tree/shrub system that
won\'t get topkilled.

Replacement fires could happen under the right conditions to take it
back to class A, but that would be unlikely. Replacement fires, modeled
at the probability of occurring every 25yrs, could also take this class
back to B under the right conditions. This would happen when there is
enough fire intensity to topkill the trees, but not enough successive
fires to take this box back to all grass (class A).

Drought would increase the fire effect in this class.

Upper Layer Lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. Perennial grasses
dominate this class with a 11% maximum tree canopy; LANDFIRE rules
increases the maximum to 20%. Above 20%, the system often moves to
North-Central Oak Savanna. *Juniperus virginiana* is also a prominent
small tree on the driest prairies.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Pole 5-9\" DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Abrams, M.D. 1992. Fire and the development of oak forests. Bioscience
42(5): 346-353.

Anderson, R.C., J.S. Fralish and J.M. Baskin, editors. 1999. Savanna,
Barrens, and Rock Outcrop Communities of North America. Cambridge
University Press.

Anderson, R.C. and M.L. Bowles, 1999. Deep-soil savannas and barrens of
the Midwestern United States. Pp. 155-170 in R.C. Anderson, J.S.
Fralish, and J.M. Baskin, eds., Savannas, Barrens, and Rock Outcrop
Plant Communities of North America. Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Curtis, J.T. 1959. The Vegetation of Wisconsin. Madison, WI. University
of Wisconsin.

NatureServe. 2007. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA, U.S.A. Data current as of 15 April 2007.

Transeau, E.N. 1935. The prairie peninsula. Ecology 16: 423-437.

Whitney, G.G. 1994. From Coastal Wilderness to Fruited Plain: a history
of environmental change in temperate North America from 1500 to the
present. Cambridge University Press.

USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences
Laboratory (2002, December). Fire Effects Information System, Kuchler
Type: Mosaic of bluestem prairie and oak-hickory forest. Available @
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.

PERSONAL COMMUNICATION:

Oak-Hickory FRCC modeling group
