**14210**

**Central Tallgrass Prairie**

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  -------------- --------------------------------- --------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                                     **Reviewers**   

  John           jaharrin@wisc.edu                 Robert Dana     [[Robert.Dana@dnr.state.mn.us]{.underline}](mailto:Robert.Dana@dnr.state.mn.us)
  Harrington                                                       

  Rich Henderson Richard.Henderson@wisconsin.gov   Dave Cleland    [[dcleland@fs.fed.us]{.underline}](mailto:dcleland@fs.fed.us)

  None           None                              Tim             tim.christiansen@us.army.mil
                                                   Christiansen    

                                                   Jim Drake       <jim_drake@natureserve.org>

                                                   Susanne Hickey  <shickey@tnc.org>
  -------------- --------------------------------- --------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Reviewed by:** Christine H. Bielski, Jessica L. Burnett, Victoria M.
Donovan, Dirac Twidwell, and Carissa L. Wonkka

**Vegetation Type**

Herbaceous

**Map Zones**

31, 38, 42, 43, 44, 50, 51

**Model Splits or Lumps**

This Biophysical Setting (BpS) is lumped with 1488 and 1420.

**Geographic Range**

This type is found across central midwestern states with typical prairie
border forests and prairie peninsula region of eastern states Iowa,
northwestern Missouri, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana,
Kentucky, and Ohio. The system interfaces and mingles on the east with
the oak savanna and on the west with mixedgrass prairie. It is
distributed with north-central sand and gravel tallgrass, which
represents the dry prairie segment and likely intermingles with the
northern tallgrass prairie to the north. Central tallgrass prairie is
found in ECOMAP sections 222Ma, 222Mb, 222Na, 222L, 222K, 222Jb, Jh, and
Ji, 251Cf, and Ch, 251Ga, Gb, and Gc. In map zone (MZ) 38, found
primarily in subsections of 251H and 251G.

**Biophysical Site Description**

Prairie dominated the landscape with oak-hickory forests existing within
fire-protected ravines or along stream corridors forming gallery forests
(Abrams 1992). While the region is strongly influenced by dry
continental air flow patterns and periodic drought, historic fire
frequency determined the prairie-forest boundary with much variation
based on topography, fuel breaks, ignition sources, and climate (Whitney
1994; Anderson and Bowles 1999). Much has been written concerning these
systems, and excellent reviews can be found in Curtis (1959), Whitney
(1994), and Anderson, Fralish, and Baskin (1999). The area is primarily
mollic grassland soils incorporating mesic and hydric prairie types
(Curtis 1959). Mesic prairies occurred on flat and rolling topography,
including some on glacial outwash with porous subsoil of sand and
gravel. Rolling areas were characterized by glacial till of recessional
moraines or on residual eolian loess deposits. Soil profiles consist of
a black surface layer rich in organic material with high water-holding
capacity. Wet prairies were found on poorly drained soils in drainage
ways and concave positions on uplands and in lowlands along waterways or
in areas subject to inundation. Lowland prairies were in and along
waterways or in areas subject to frequent inundation. Soils are rich in
organic matter and show evidence of inundation in a gleying layer 3-4ft
below the surface. The region is strongly influenced by dry continental
air flow patterns and periodic drought (Whitney 1994).

**Vegetation Description**

Dominated by big bluestem (*Andropogon gerardii*), Indiangrass
(*Sorghastrum nutans*), and prairie dropseed (*Sporobolus heterolepsis*)
on more mesic sites, with prairie cordgrass (*Spartina pectinata*) and
bluejoint grass dominating the wet sites. Secondary species such as
little bluestem (*Schizachyrium scoparium*) and porcupine grass (*Stipa
spartea*) occupied the drier portions of these uplands and soil types
and varied in importance. Forb families had their largest representation
in aster and legume. Conspicuous perennial forbs included the genera
*Asclepias*, *Aster*, *Echinacea*, *Helianthus*, *Solidago*, *Liatris*,
*Dalea*, and *Viola*. Prairie shrubs include the genera *Amorpha*,
*Rosa* spp., and *Ceanothus*.

**BpS Dominant and Indicator Species**

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ANGE         *Andropogon gerardii*            Big bluestem

  SONU2        *Sorghastrum nutans*             Indiangrass

  SPHE         *Sporobolus heterolepis*         Prairie dropseed

  SPPE         *Spartina pectinata*             Prairie cordgrass
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

**Disturbance Description**

Frequent fires impacted this prairie system every 1-3yrs, maintaining
grass and forb vegetation. Insect and small mammal herbivory impacts
composition and dominance. Large mammals were present, including bison,
elk, and deer, but impacts were likely minimal. Fire played an important
role in the maintenance of the tallgrass prairie (Curtis 1959; Vogl
1974; Anderson 1990). Fire could occur throughout the year with larger,
less frequent fires occurring during the dormant season and smaller,
more frequent fires occurring during the growing season. Native American
burning, essential to maintaining the eastern tallgrass prairie, was
bimodal in distribution, peaking in April and October, with lightning
ignition occurring primarily during July and August (Higgins 1986).
Bison grazing as a major disturbance was likely much more limited than
prairies further west. Elk probably contributed to the impact of grazing
and browsing as well, but it is assumed that the total contributions of
these two species were still considerably less than to the west. The elk
may have contributed to the reduction of young woody saplings invading
prairie adjacent to protected woody areas.

Maximum estimates of fire behavior for central tallgrass prairie, based
on a conservative model in Twidwell et al. (2016), is 540m min^-1^ for
rate of fire spread, 50,372kW m^-1^ for fireline intensity, and 11.3m
for flame length.

Today's prescribed fires have reduced maximum rate of fire spread and
fireline intensity 81 and 85%, on average, while maximum flame length
has been reduced 59% (Twidwell et al. 2016).

**Fire Frequency**

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

**Scale Description**

Within regions of varied topography, type patches are typically large
(\>1,000ac), most prevalent on flat to rolling topography. Most fires
were stand-replacement in nature. Once ignited, dormant season fires
would have spread over a large area until reaching a major firebreak
(e.g., previously burned area, major river, rugged terrain, etc.).
Growing-season fires may have been frequent but smaller in size than
dormant-season fires due to the greenness of the fuel and rain following
lightning ignition. Growing-season fires during drought years would have
been much like dormant-season fires. Mixed fires were probably limited
to patchy grazed areas or areas where fuel was not uniformly cured.

Between 1984-2014, within MZs 31, 38, and 43 (Central Tallgrass
Prairie), 98, 122, and 318 wildfires occurred, respectively (MTBS 2016).
The largest wildfires during this time period were\~77,000ac in MZ31,
\~68,000ac in MZ38, and \~122,000ac in MZ43 (MTBS 2016). Mean wildfire
size within MZs 31, 38, and 43 was \~8,000, 4,000, and 3,900ac,
respectively (MTBS 2016).

**Adjacency or Identification Concerns**

Central tallgrass prairie would be adjacent to north-central interior
oak savanna, north-central oak barrens, north-central interior sand and
gravel prairie, and sedge meadows and wet prairie.

Synonymous names for this system include: mesic prairie, wet prairie,
deep soil prairie, and blacksoil prairie.

This BpS might be confused with the north-central interior sand and
gravel prairie.

In the absence of historic fire, invasive problems have increased
dramatically, including gray dogwood, American plum, and hazelnut.
Exotics that have become invasive due to agricultural practices and
roadside plantings include reed canary grass, leafy spurge (*Euphorbia
esula*), sweet clover (*Melilotus alba*), crown vetch, yellow parsnip,
and birds foot trefoil. Domestic livestock grazing is also an issue. For
many regions in MZs 31 and 38 and the western region of MZ43, eastern
red cedar is highly abundant and encroaching at alarming rates.

Today this system has a severely reduced native cover (\~99.9% loss),
particularly for the mesic component of this type, due to conversion to
other uses such as agriculture. In addition to the massive reduction in
extent of mesic prairie, the scale of its occurrence has also severely
been altered. Currently, this type occurs in fragmented small patches
ranging from 1-10ac. Altering of the type is due to grazing and reduced
fire, resulting in greater shrub and tree component and a variety of
native and non-native shrubs as well as non-native cool season grasses
(brome, bluegrass, quackgrass, and redtop), resulting in reduced
diversity.

This system has mainly been converted to agriculture and other
development. Invasion of cool-season grasses and shrubs often mask the
identification of this type. It may be difficult to determine the
difference between old fields and native prairie patches by using aerial
photos or remote sensing data.

Again, species composition and structure were dependent on local factors
such as topography, soil conditions, fire regime, plant competition, and
plant-animal interactions (Anderson and Bowles 1999).

As indicated, this system interfaces and mingles on the east with oak
savanna and on the west with mixedgrass prairie (in Nebraska and the
Dakotas). On the east, there would be limited woody invasion from
protected areas during periods of increased precipitation. The woody
component would be limited to the edge of the prairie and would not
exhibit any appreciable effect overall. Since mixedgrass prairie is to
the west, there would be little effect except that, in periods of
extended drought, the percentage of the mixedgrass species would
increase.

This system differs functionally from North-Central Interior Sand and
Gravel Tallgrass Prairie due to fire intensity \-- heavier fuel leading
to higher fire intensity and a stronger competition from grass, making
it more difficult for trees and shrubs to move into this system.

**Issues or Problems**

The plant-animal interactions are not fully understood for this model,
and numerous studies of these phenomena are ongoing. Research exists for
bison/fire interaction in detail in the western range of this system
(i.e., Kansas and Nebraska). Also, there is possible overlap with the
North Central Interior Oak Savanna model (BpS ID 1394, MZs 41, 50, and
51). There is variation in oak species composition across the broad
region covered by this model (i.e., bur oak \[*Quercus macrocarpa*\]
increases in prevalence in the western portion of the range). There is
also great variation in prairie type across this region. Within the
western ranges of this type, there was a grazing and fire interaction.
As one moves east in this region, fire increases to where it is the
major disturbance factor for this type and grazing drops out as an
influence. The species composition also changes from east to west. Much
of the literature on fire in the tallgrass prairie does not include
interaction with herbivory (Engle and Bidwell 2001); thus, interpreting
effects must be qualified. In addition, little is known about native
ungulate grazing in this area. It is generally accepted that bison
grazing was less in this grassland than in grasslands to the west. Even
within this type, grazing likely played a larger role as one moves from
east to west. Further, it has been recently suggested that elk
populations may have been large enough to have an effect on vegetative
composition. Some woody plant invasion may have occurred, but it was
limited to areas close to seed sources, such as along the eastern
interface with the savanna and around woody pockets and river valleys.

**Native Uncharacteristic Conditions**

Many small trees and shrubs would be uncharacteristic of this system
historically but occurs today due to the lack of fire. For many regions
in MZs 31 and 38 and the western region of MZ43, eastern red cedar is
highly abundant and is encroaching at alarming rates. Domestic livestock
grazing has also severely degraded this system. Haying would also have
altered the species composition, especially for forbs species. Insects
may not be as prevalent in modern times due to fragmentation (hypothesis
by Tim Christiansen, personal communication).

**Comments**

For MZ44, this model was imported from MZ50 without changes except that,
in MZ50, BpS 1421 was lumped with BpS 1488 and 1420. This lump does not
apply in MZ44 because BpS 1488 and 1420 do not occur in the MZ. The MZ50
model was developed by John Harrington and Rich Henderson and reviewed
by Robert Dana (Robert.Dana@dnr.state.mn.us), Dave Cleland
(dcleland@fs.fed.us), and Tim Christiansen
(tim.christiansen@us.army.mil). Modeler-ship was not changed in MZ44
because no changes were made to the description or the model. No review
was received for MZ44.

Suggested reviewers: Dave Borneman; see also sand and gravel parried
reviewers. This model was reviewed at the Landfire Vegetation Modeling
Workshop for MZs 50, 51, and 41 by Elena Conteras, Randy Swaty, Mike
Kost, Chris Weber, Doug Cox, and Becky Schillo.

This model was adapted from the Rapid Assessment model R4PRTGc Tallgrass
Prairie \-- Central created by Daryl Smith daryl.smith@uni.edu and
reviewed by Tom Bragg (tom.bragg@mail.unomaha.edu), John Ortmann
(jortmann@tnc.org), and an anonymous reviewer.

***Succession Classes***

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 40 Early Development 1 - Open

*[Indicator Species]{.underline}*

  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                           Position**

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii      Big bluestem       Upper

  SONU2        Sorghastrum nutans       Indiangrass        Upper

  SPPE         Spartina pectinata       Prairie cordgrass  Upper

  SPHE         Sporobolus heterolepis   Prairie dropseed   Upper
  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ------------------

*[Description]{.underline}*

Post-Fire Regrowth Stage \-- Duration: 2yrs. From blackened state, rapid
regrowth of fire-positive and fire-neutral perennial vegetation to
maximum height by end of growing season. Warm-season grasses and
fire-positive forbs display increased height, flowering, and fruiting
and appear to be more abundant depending on season of the burn. Annual,
biennial, and short-lived perennial species occupy space opened by
litter removal. Fire-neutral perennial forbs maintain pre-fire
composition but may appear to be reduced. Fire-negative species are
reduced. No litter accumulation in this class. Probability of a
replacement fire is 1.00 as all surface fires are replacement in this
system.

Upper-layer lifeform is not the dominant lifeform. Open refers to
absence of tree or shrub canopy cover.

The cover in this class is defined as 0-70% for mapping purposes.
However, it could really go up to 100% cover.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 58 Mid Development 1 - Open

*[Indicator Species]{.underline}*

  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                           Position**

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii      Big bluestem       Upper

  SONU2        Sorghastrum nutans       Indiangrass        Upper

  SPPE         Spartina pectinata       Prairie cordgrass  Upper

  SPHE         Sporobolus heterolepis   Prairie dropseed   Upper
  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ------------------

*[Description]{.underline}*

Unburned Stage \-- Duration: 2-4yrs. This unburned stage continues to be
dominated by big bluestem (*Andropogon gerardii*), Indiangrass
(*Sorghastrum nutans*), and prairie dropseed on more mesic sites, with
prairie cordgrass (*Spartina pectinata*) and bluejoint grass dominating
the wet sites. Secondary species such as little bluestem (*Schizachyrium
scoparium*) and porcupine grass (*Stipa spartea*) occupied the drier
portions of these uplands and soil types and varied in importance.
Perennial forbs include genera such as *Asclepias*, *Aster*,
*Echinacea*, *Helianthus*, *Solidago*, *Liatris*, *Dalea*, and *Viola*.
Noticeable scattered shrubs, *Amorpha*, *Rosa* spp., and *Coenothus*,
annually increase in size. Litter accumulates annually. Annuals,
biennials, and short-lived perennials gradually become less abundant.

The cover in this class is defined for mapping purposes as 71-100%. Some
shrubs might be coming up in this stage.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class C 2 Late Development 1 - All Structures

*[Indicator Species]{.underline}*

  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ ------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                         Position**

  ANGE         Andropogon gerardii    Big bluestem       Middle

  SPPE         Spartina pectinata     Prairie cordgrass  Middle

  SALI         Salix ligulifolia      Strapleaf willow   Upper

  CORA6        Cornus racemosa        Gray dogwood       Upper
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ ------------------

*[Description]{.underline}*

Unburned Thatch Accumulation Stage -- Duration: 5-20yrs. Continuation of
unburned state from Class B; however, with lack of fire for the long
term, the prairie matrix weakens, and it is succeeded by woody cover of
shrubs and trees, depending on proximity of woody seed sources. Without
fire, the length of this stage is dependent on precipitation and
temperature as well as topography and soils. It can be inferred that the
effect of large ungulates, bison and elk, was highly limited in this
region of this type. Probability of a replacement fire is 0.33
approximately.

As thatch builds up, grasses will start to lose vigor and become less
competitive, and then shrubs or trees might start moving in more, which
would be uncharacteristic because that would be due in part to lack of
fire.

Add successional class to account for encroachment of eastern red cedar
and the potential for a closed-canopy juniper woodland state in MZs 31
and 38 and the western region of MZ43. This process is briefly described
under the native uncharacteristic condition sections but is not
accounted for as a potential successional class. An example of a
late-development class consisting of closed-canopy juniper woodland is
described in BpS 11320 \-- 31.

Herbaceous layer is still dominant. But grass cover declining due to
thatch; won\'t be as dense.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Model Parameters

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

References

Abrams, M.D. 1992. Fire and the development of oak forests. BioScience.
42(5): 346-353.

Anderson, R.C. 1990. The Historic Role of Fire in the North American
Grassland. In: Collins, S.L and L.L. Wallace, eds. Fire in North
American Tallgrass Prairie. University of Oklahoma Press.

Anderson, R.C. and M.L. Bowles. 1999. Deep-soil savannas and barrens of
the Midwestern United States. In Anderson, R.C., J.S. Fralish and J.M.
Baskin, eds. Savannas, Barrens, and Rock Outcrop Plant Communities of
North America. Cambridge, UK: 155-170.

Anderson, R.C., J.S. Fralish and J.M. Baskin, eds. 1999. Savannas,
Barrens, and Rock Outcrop Plant Communities of North America. Cambridge,
UK: 155-170.

Briggs, J. M., Knapp, A. K., Blair, J. M., Heisler, J. L., Hoch, G. A.,
Lett, M. S., & McCarron, J. K. (2005). An ecosystem in transition:
causes and consequences of the conversion of mesic grassland to
shrubland. *BioScience*, *55*(3), 243-254.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. The Vegetation of Wisconsin. University of Wisconsin
Press.

Engle, D.M. and Bidwell, T.G., 2001. Viewpoint: the response of central
North American prairies to seasonal fire. Journal of Range Management.
54: 2-10.

[Engle, D. M., Coppedge, B. R., & Fuhlendorf, S. D. (2008). From the
dust bowl to the green glacier: human activity and environmental change
in Great Plains grasslands. In *Western North American Juniperus
Communities* (pp. 253-271). Springer New York.]{.mark}

Higgins, Kenneth F. 1986. Interpretation and Compendium of Historical
Fire Accounts in the Northern Great Plains. Resource Publication 161. US
Dept of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service.

MTBS Data Access: National Geospatial Data. (2016, April - last
revised). MTBS Project (USDA Forest Service/U.S. Geological Survey).
Available online: http://www.mtbs.gov/nationalregional/burnedarea.html
\[2016, April 29\].

NatureServe. 2007. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA. Data current as of 10 February 2007.

[Owensby, C. E., Blan, K. R., Eaton, B. J., & Russ, O. G. (1973).
Evaluation of eastern redcedar infestations in the northern Kansas Flint
Hills. *Journal of Range Management*, 256-260.]{.mark}

[Ratajczak, Z., Nippert, J. B., & Collins, S. L. (2012). Woody
encroachment decreases diversity across North American grasslands and
savannas.]{.mark}

[Twidwell, D., Fuhlendorf, S. D., Engle, D. M., & Taylor, C. A. (2009).
Surface fuel sampling strategies: linking fuel measurements and fire
effects. *Rangeland Ecology & Management*, *62*(3), 223-229.]{.mark}

[Twidwell, D., Rogers, W. E., Fuhlendorf, S. D., Wonkka, C. L., Engle,
D. M., Weir, J. R., & Taylor, C. A. (2013). The rising Great Plains fire
campaign: citizens\' response to woody plant encroachment. *Frontiers in
Ecology and the Environment*, *11*(s1).]{.mark}

**Twidwell, D.**, A.S. West, W.B. Hiatt, A.L. Ramirez, J.T. Winter, D.M.
Engle, S.D. Fuhlendorf, J.D. Carlson. 2016. Plant invasions or fire
policy: which has altered fire behavior more in tallgrass prairie?
Ecosystems 19:356-368.

Vogl, R.J. 1964. Vegetation history of Crex Meadows, a prairie savanna
in northwestern Wisconsin. American Midland Naturalist 72: 157-175.

Vogl, R.J. 1974. Effects of fire on grasslands. In: Kozlowski, T.T. and
C.E. Ahlgren, eds. Fire and Ecosystems. Academic Press, New York.

Whitney, G.G. 1994. From Coastal Wilderness to Fruited Plain: a history
of environmental change in temperate North America from 1500 to the
present. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
