# 14440 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Eastern Boreal Floodplain {#eastern-boreal-floodplain .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 5/30/2018

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                               **Reviewers**   
  -------------- --------------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Jim Drake      jim_drake@natureserve.org   Chris Dunham    cdunham@tnc.org

  Alan Tepley    tepleya@onid.orst.edu       Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

                                                             
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Mixed Upland and Wetland

Map Zones

41, 50, 51

Geographic Range

This system is largely found in eastern Canada with limited occurrences
in northern Minnesota, northern Michigan and northern Maine.

Biophysical Site Description

River valleys are linear depressions that contain a river channel and
its floodplain, often embedded within a series of higher terraces. River
valleys, formed by the meltwater of glaciers, occur in glacial outwash
channels. The river floodplain is the low-lying area adjacent to the
river that was formed under the present drainage system and is subject
to periodic flooding and cycles of erosion and deposition. In contrast,
terraces are former floodplain surfaces at higher elevations than the
floodplain that were abandoned when the river channel incised lower into
the valley floor. Within the broader landscape, river valleys represent
an unusually diverse mosaic of landforms, physical environmental
factors, species and biological communities because of their abrupt
environmental gradients and complex ecological processes (Naiman et al.
1993, Gregory et al. 1991, Brinson 1990). Floodplain forests occur along
streams or rivers that are third order or greater (Strahler 1952).

Vegetation Description

This system includes floodplain forests dominated by black ash and
balsam poplar as well as herbaceous sloughs and shrubby wetlands.
Alders, dogwood, mountain maple, bluejoint and sedges are common in the
understory or in non-forested areas.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  FRNI         *Fraxinus nigra*                 Black ash

  POBA2        *Populus balsamifera*            Balsam poplar
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Floodplain systems are produced and maintained by active hydrologic and
geomorphic processes such as channel meandering, sedimentation and
erosion (Gregory, et al. 1991) caused by natural hydrological variation
(Richter and Richter 2000). Regeneration of the dominant species (balsam
poplar and black ash) is dependent on flooding and movement of river
channels, which creates bare, moist soil needed for seedling
establishment (Scott et al. 1997). Oxbow and slough development also
influence the floodplain system and create variability in plant
community composition. Deposits of sand and other sediments can create
low ridges that influence vegetation establishment (Weaver 1960). The
flood frequency in a given area is dependent upon its location on the
floodplain, with upper terraces having infrequent flooding and scouring
events, while the lower terraces nearest the river flood frequently.
Scouring caused by ice jams during the winter, channel meandering, and
oxbow and slough development greatly influence this system.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Patches must be adequate in size to contain natural variation in
vegetation and disturbance regime. This system is often widespread on
medium or larger rivers and should be at least 0.5 miles long and 100m
wide.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Issues or Problems

Assumptions: This system is most affected by flooding, scouring and
channel movement. We modeled the floodplain valley including forested
and non-forested areas. The model does include wetlands, sloughs or
oxbows. We used two flooding regimes in the model: Option 1 -- minor
flooding/scouring; and Option 2 -- major flooding/scouring. Flood
frequency for a class is based on location on the floodplain, with
higher terraces being subject to longer flood cycles. We modeled
attributes such as channel migration, oxbow and slough development, and
sedimentation. Fire activity had a minor impact, due to low intensity,
infrequent intervals, small size and low fuel loads.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 14 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific       **Common Name**       **Canopy Position**
               Name**                                   
  ------------ ------------------ --------------------- -------------------
  ALIN2        Alnus incana       Gray alder            Upper

  COSE16       Cornus sericea     Redosier dogwood      Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Primary successional stage after significant flooding/scouring events.
This class is usually dominated by shrubs and small trees. Common canopy
species include *Alnus incana*, *Cornus sericea*, *Fraxinus nigra*,
*Populus balsamifera*, and sometimes *Abies balsamea*.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Seedling \<4.5ft

Class B 35 Mid Development 1 - Open

DBH

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  POBA2        Populus balsamifera    Balsam poplar      Upper

  FRNI         Fraxinus nigra         Black ash          Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Young forests after trees have become established and dominate most
areas. Limited canopy diversity. Dominant trees are *Populus
balsamifera* and *Fraxinus nigra*.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\" DBH

Class C 38 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  FRNI         Fraxinus nigra         Black ash          Upper

  POBA2        Populus balsamifera    Balsam poplar      Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mature forests subject to moderately frequent long-term flooding.
Dominant species are *Fraxinus nigra* and *Populus balsamifera*.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 13 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**    **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  ABBA         Abies balsamea         Balsam fir         Upper

  ACRU         Acer rubrum            Red maple          Upper

  PIMA         Picea mariana          Black spruce       Upper

  POBA2        Populus balsamifera    Balsam poplar      Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Forests in the floodplain that are very rarely subject to significant
flooding. Diversity increases and mesic species increase in importance.
Dominant species include *Abies balsamea*, *Acer rubrum*, *Populus
balsamifera*, *Picea mariana*, and *Pinus strobus*.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\" DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: Minor flooding 5-20yrs.

Optional 2: Minor flooding 5-20yrs.

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Brinson, M.M. 1990. Riverine forests. Pp. 87-141 in D.Goodall, A. Lugo,
M. Brinson, and S. Brown (eds.), Ecosystems of the World, Forested
Wetlands, Vol. 15. Elsevier, New York. 527 pp.

Forest Cover Types of the United States and Canada, SAF 1980, F.H. Eyre,
Editor.

Gregory, S.V., F.J. Swanson, W.A. McKee and K.W. Cummins. 1991. An
ecosystem perspective of riparian zones. Bioscience 41: 540-551.

Naiman, R.J., Decamps, H. and Pollock, M. 1993. The role of riparian
corridors in maintaining regional biodiversity. Ecological Applications.
3: 209--212.

Richter, B.D. and H.E. Richter. 2000. Prescribing flood regimes to
sustain riparian ecosystems along meandering rivers. Conservation
Biology 14: 1467-1478.

Scott, M. L., G. T. Auble and J.M. Friedman. 1997. Flood dependency of
cottonwood establishment along the Missouri River, Montana, USA.
Ecological Applications 7: 677--690.

Strahler, A.N. 1952. Dynamic Basis of Geomorphology. Geological Society
of America Bulletin 63: 923-938.

Tepley, A.J., J.G. Cohen and L. Huberty. 2004. Natural community
abstract for southern floodplain forest. Michigan Natural Features
Inventory, Lansing, MI. 14 pp.

Weaver, J.E. 1960. Flood plain vegetation of the central Missouri Valley
and contacts of woodland with prairie. Ecological Monographs. 30(1):
37-64.
