# 14660 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Great Lakes Wooded Dune and Swale {#great-lakes-wooded-dune-and-swale .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                           **Reviewers**   
  -------------- ----------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Dennis Albert  albertd@michigan.gov    Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  Becky Schillo  schillor@michigan.gov   None            None

  None           None                    None            None
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Mixed Upland and Wetland

Map Zones

50, 51

Geographic Range

Great Lakes Wooded Dune and Swale complexes are found along the Great
Lakes in Ontario, MI, WI, IL, IN, OH and PA. Of the 90 to 95 wooded dune
and swale complexes that occurred in the Great Lakes Region, 70 were
located in MI along the shores of Huron, MI, and Superior (Comer and
Albert 1993). In MI wooded dune and swales are be found in subsections
212 S (all subsections; Cleland et al. 2007), 212 R (all subsections),
212 Hl, 212 Hf, 212 Hb, 212 Hj, 212 Hg, 222 Ue and 222 Ud.

For MN, this BpS occurred in Subsection 212Lb.

Biophysical Site Description

This complex of wetland swales and upland beach ridges (dunes) is found
in embayments and on large sand spits along the shoreline of the Great
Lakes. Many complexes began forming when the Great Lakes were at glacial
Lake Algonquin levels, approximately 12,000yrs ago (Comer and Albert
1993, Dorr and Eschman 1970), but in the southern Great Lakes, some of
the large complexes are younger, approximately 6,000yrs old
(Chrzastowski and Thompson 1992, Thompson 1992). Receding lake levels
deposited a series of sandy beach ridges ranging from 0.5-40.0m high.
From the air, these ridges appear as a series of arcs generally parallel
to the shoreline, and often extending up to two miles inland. The dune
ridges can be quite numerous, with 150 ridges forming over 6,000yrs near
Gary, Indiana (Thompson 1992) and 108 ridges forming over 3,500yrs in
northern lower MI (Lichter 1998). \[Text from Albert, D.A. and P.J.
Comer 1999.\]

Vegetation Description

Because they contain a unique assemblage of physiographic, soil and
vegetative components and provide a high quality habitat for numerous
shoreline animal species, the Wooded Dune and Swale Complex is
considered a distinct natural community in MI (MNFI 1990). Classic
ecological studies have identified distinctive successional zones within
the sand dune portion of the complexes, determined on the basis of
several factors, including distance from the lake, amount of soil
development and available light (Olson 1958, Cowles 1899).

The foredunes of most dune and swale complexes are commonly 1-2m high,
with beach grass (*Ammophila breviligulata*), dune grass (*Calamovilfa
longifolia*), autumn willow (*Salix serissima*), dune willow (*S.
cordata*), and balsam poplar (*Populus balsamifera*) most common. Within
their ranges, federally-threatened Pitcher\'s thistle (*Cirsium
pitcheri*) and state-threatened Lake Huron tansy (*Tanacetum huronense*)
are also found on the foredunes.

Immediately behind the foredune, where lake-influenced, calcareous sands
are most common, a shallow swale often contains twig-rush (*Cladium
mariscoides*), sweet gale (*Myrica gale*), shrubby cinquefoil
(*Potentilla fruticosa*), blue joint grass (*Calamagrostis canadensis*),
Kalm\'s lobelia (*Lobelia kalmii*), false asphodel (*Tofieldia
glutinosa*), and grass-of-Parnassus (*Parnassia glauca*). Less commonly,
in the Straits of Mackinac area, federally threatened Houghton\'s
goldenrod (*Solidago houghtonii*) is found in the swales behind the
foredune.

The swale immediately behind the foredune is influenced by short-term
variation in lake levels and can be partially or occasionally completely
filled by dune sands following major storm events. Species common to
this first swale include the rushes (*Juncus balticus*, *J. pelocarpus*,
J*. Nodosus*), spike rush, (*Eleocharis acicularis*), and threesquare
(*Scirpus americanus*).

A low dune field with more advanced plant succession often follows the
first open dunes and swales. Jack pine (*Pinus banksiana*), white pine
(*P. strobus*), and red pine (*P. Resinosa*) often form a scattered
overstory canopy, while ground juniper (*Juniperus communis*), creeping
juniper (*J. Horizontalis*), bearberry (*Arctostaphylos uva-ursi*),
beach grass and June grass (*Koeleria macrantha*) form a scattered
ground layer.

Following the dune-field zone, both dunes and swales are typically
forested. Moist swales are often forested and soil organic material has
often begun to accumulate. Northern white cedar (*Thuja occidentalis*),
speckled alder (*Alnus rugosa*), willows (*Salix* spp.) and red maple
(*Acer rubrum*) dominate the partial overstory canopy and understory. In
northern Lake Michigan and Lake Huron, where these swales are better
drained and northern white cedar forms the overstory,
federally-threatened dwarf lake iris (*Iris lacustris*) may be found in
large non-flowering populations. In contrast to the dry or moist swales,
in those swales where standing water is present through most of the
year, sedges (*Carex aquatilis*) and (*C. stricta*), twigrush, marsh
marigold (*Caltha palustris*), swamp candles (*Lysimachia terrestris*),
and swamp cinquefoil (*Potentilla palustris*) commonly dominate the
ground layer.

Forested beach ridges, with soils of medium to course sand, tend to be
dominated by species common to dry-mesic and mesic northern forest (MNFI
1990). Soil moisture conditions appear to change dramatically with
slight elevational changes and are reflected in the development of soil
organic material and changing plant species. On higher, drier ridges,
soils often have less than three cm of organic material. Red pine, white
pine and red oak (*Quercus rubra*) are often co-dominant, while paper
birch (*Betula papyrifera*), bigtooth aspen (*Populus grandidentata*),
balsam fir (*Abies balsamea*), and red maple are sub-dominant or
understory species. Bracken fern (*Pteridium aquilinum*), black
huckleberry (*Gaylussacia baccata*), blueberry (*Vaccinium
myrtilloides*), bunchberry (*Cornus canadensis*), and wintergreen
(*Gaultheria procumbens*) occur in the shrub and ground layers.

On lower ridges, where soils are moister, soil organic material
accumulation is greater. White pine may still dominate the overstory,
but often white spruce, black spruce, red maple, balsam fir, northern
white cedar and occasionally tamarack (*Larix laricina*) are
co-dominant. Canada honeysuckle (*Lonicera canadensis*), mountain holly
(*Nemopanthus mucronatus*), twinflower (*Linnaea borealis*), dwarf
blackberry (*Rubus pubescens*), Canada mayflower (*Maianthemum
canadensis*) and starflower (*Trientalis borealis*) are common in the
shrub and ground layers.

Complexes located in embayments protected from prevailing winds tend to
be formed entirely of low, water-lain beach ridges. As a result, even
the beach ridges within these complexes support wetland vegetation. An
example is Ogontz Bay, in the eastern Upper Peninsula of MI. Here swales
ranged from 1-30m wide and 0.5-30.0m deep.

Narrow, shallow swales are forested with northern white cedar, black
spruce and red maple, with speckled alder and willows in the understory
and shrub layers and sedges (*Carex disperma*), (C*. trisperma*), (*C.
leptalea*), (*C. interior*), (*C. cryptolepis*), (*C. flava*), (*C.
intumescens*), blue joint grass, fowl manna grass (*Glyceria striata*),
water horehound (*Lycopus uniflorus*), and sphagnum mosses (*Sphagnum*
spp.) in the ground layer.

Wider, deeper swales are more often unforested, with chokeberry (*Aronia
prunifolia*), red osier dogwood (*Cornus stolonifera*), bog birch
(*Betula pumila*), and speckled alder forming a shrubby ecotone, while
sedges (*Carex lasiocarpa*), (*C. oligosperma*), (*C. aquatilis*), (*C.
stricta*), and woolgrass (*Scirpus cyperinus*) form a mat within which
marsh fern (*Thelypteris palustris*) and horned bladderwort
(*Utricularia cornuta*) also occur. Where a sedge mat is not well
developed, bur-reed (*Sparganium minimum*), pond-lily (*Nuphar
variegata*), and pondweeds (*Potamogeton berchtoldii* and *P. natans*)
are commonly found.

Organic material gradually accumulates in the swales over time; organic
material in swales reaches a depth of 30-75cm within 300m of the lake\'s
edge. Vegetation in

swales reflects the more acid conditions of the older thickets as peat
accumulations. Leatherleaf (*Chamaedaphne calyculata*), bog rosemary
(*Andromeda glaucophylla*), Labrador tea (*Ledum groenlandicum*), bog
laurel (*Kalmia polifolia*), large cranberry (*Vaccinium macrocarpon*),
cottongrass (*Eriophorum virginicum*), pitcher-plant (*Sarracenia
purpurea*), Sphagnum mosses (*Sphagnum centrale*, *S. wulfianum*, *S.
warnstorfii*, *S. Magellanicum*, and *S. squarrosum*) are commonly found
in the thick peat soils of the swale behind the shoreline. An even
stronger pattern of increased organic matter accumulation occurs farther
north along Lake Superior. For example, at Grand Traverse Bay in
Keweenaw County, very low beach ridges and swales have thick
accumulation of acid organic matter, with bog-like vegetation in the
first swale of the shoreline. \[Text from Albert, D.A. and P.J. Comer
1999.\]

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  AMBR         *Ammophila breviligulata*        American beachgrass

  CALO         *Calamovilfa longifolia*         Prairie sandreed

  JUNCU        *Juncus*                         Rush

  PIBA2        *Pinus banksiana*                Jack pine

  PIRE         *Pinus resinosa*                 Red pine

  PIST         *Pinus strobus*                  Eastern white pine

  THOC2        *Thuja occidentalis*             Arborvitae

  ELAC         *Eleocharis acicularis*          Needle spikerush
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Natural processes: These complexes are best developed where streams
provide a dependable sand source. The combination of along-shore
currents, waves, and wind form foredunes along the shoreline. With
gradual long-term drops in water level, combined with post-glacial
uplifting of the earth\'s crust, these low dunes gradually rise above
the direct influence of the lakes, and new foredunes replace them. Over
several thousand years (far beyond the scope of this model), a series of
ridges and swales is created. For most complexes, the flow of surface
streams and groundwater maintain the wet conditions in the swales. Along
the Lake Superior shoreline, where post-glacial uplift is greatest, many
of the complexes consist primarily of dry, forested swales. The number
and size of the dune ridges and swales differs depending on fetch and
the amount of sediment available. (Comer and Albert 1993)

Lichter\'s (1998) recent study of dune and swale complexes at Wilderness
State Park in northern Lower Michigan has identified similar
successional trends. He found that, at the Lake Michigan shoreline,
young dunes had 1) stronger winds, 2) more sand burial and erosion, 3)
higher levels of sunlight, 4) higher rates of evaporation and 5) lower
available nitrogen and phosphorus than older beach ridges farther
inland, resulting in an open herbaceous-dominated plant community along
the shore. Farther inland, with greater protection from sun and wind and
with greater soil development, there was succession from open dune,
first to grassland, then to shrubs, and finally to forests, with mesic
northern hardwoods increasing in dominance on beach ridges farther from
the shoreline.

Both swales and upland dune ridges were studied by MNFI (Comer and
Albert 1991, 1993). Of the 17 sites where elevations were measured from
the shoreline inland, only three sites contained swales where the sandy
bottoms of all or most of the swales lay below the current Great Lakes
water levels. This suggests that, except for a few examples, the
influence of Great Lakes water-level fluctuations is probably limited to
the first few swales inland from the shoreline. For most of the
complexes, the water occupying the swales comes from streams flowing
from the adjacent uplands or from groundwater seepage. \[Text from
Albert, D.A. and P.J. Comer 1999.\]

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

This system is truly a complex of natural communities that occur in a
repeated pattern on landscapes influences by the Great Lakes. The
complex is a large-patch system comprised of linear arc-shaped
communities that parallel the Great Lakes shoreline.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Many wooded dune and swale complexes have been destroyed, degraded and
fragmented by anthropogenic disturbances. Protecting hydrology is
important in the maintenance of vegetative structure in wooded dune and
swale complexes. Road development across the swales, even with culverts,
typically modifies the hydrology. Marinas, typically requiring dredging
and other major modification of the wetlands, have been constructed in
some complexes. Golf courses have also been built on complexes and
unsuccessfully proposed for others. Intensive use as deer yards has
greatly altered the wetlands in the Upper Peninsula, where regeneration
of northern white cedar has been eliminated or greatly reduced. In some
deer yarding areas, conversion of the ridges to aspen has also been
proposed. Residential development has resulted in major alteration of
several dune and swale complexes, due to several factors, including road
and driveway construction, wetland filling and septic leakage. Nutrient
addition from leaking septic tanks and drain fields is suspected of
contributing to the dominance of invasives such as *Typha angustifolia*
(narrowleaved cat-tail), giant bulrush and purple loosestrife. \[Text
from Albert, D.A. and P.J. Comer 1999.\]

Issues or Problems

This model represents a complex of spatially explicit natural
communities that occur in a repeatable pattern along the Great Lakes.
Although some natural processes such as hydrology, plant succession and
wind action influence the entire complex, each community is also
controlled by processes such as insects, disease and possibly fire.
These internal dynamics may set a community back to an earlier seral
stage of specific community but not send it to a different class of the
model. For example a drought or fire may kill a percentage of pine or
oak trees on an inland dune ridge, setting the dry forest to a mid-seral
stage, but given the topography of the complex it would not convert the
dry dune ridge into a swale.

Additionally in the time-span of the LANDFIRE model (1,000yrs) it is not
possible to model the long-term processes that created these complexes,
the gradual long-term decline in glacial lake water levels and
post-glacial uplift. Also the fluctuation of glacial lake levels and
post-glacial uplift were stochastic climatic events, making it difficult
to guess when or if they may occur again.

Essentially, the classes as modeled represent two parallel pathways -
one for dune and one for swale - on a time scale beyond the 1,000yr time
frame of the model. Therefore each class is set to range in age between
0-999yrs.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 23 Early Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                             Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ -------------------- ----------------
  AMBR         Ammophila breviligulata  American beachgrass  Lower

  CALO         Calamovilfa longifolia   Prairie sandreed     Lower

  POBA2        Populus balsamifera      Balsam poplar        Upper

  SALIX        Salix                    Willow               Middle
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Early seral dune: On the landscape, this class would be located closest
to the lake but since the model is aspatial, it is characterized here by
its vegetation rather than its spatial location. This class may also be
referred to a an open dune/foredune. It is influenced by along-shore
currents, waves, wind and fluctuating Great Lakes water levels. The
dominant lifeform would be the herbaceous layer of *Calamovilfa
longifolia* and *Ammophila brevilgulata*. Given that these are foredunes
subject to shifting sands and blowouts large portions may non- to
sparsely vegetated.

Foredunes are typically 1-2m high and dominated by beach grass
(*Ammophila breviligulata*), dune grass (*Calamovilfa longifolia*),
Autumn willow (*Salix serissima*), dune willow (*Salix cordata*) and
balsam poplar (*Populus balsamifera*). Rare plants such as Lake Huron
tansy (*Tanacetum huronense*) and Pitcher\'s thistle (*Cirsium
pitcheri*).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 23 Early Development 2 - Open

Indicator Species

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                              Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- -------------------- ----------------
  JUNCU        Juncus                    Rush                 Lower

  ELAC         Eleocharis acicularis     Needle spikerush     Lower

  SCAM6        Schoenoplectus americanus Chairmaker\'s        Lower
                                         bulrush              

  CLMA         Cladium mariscoides       Smooth sawgrass      Lower
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Early seral swale: On the landscape, this class would be located between
the foredune and nearshore dunes closest to the lake but since the model
is aspatial, it is characterized here by its vegetation rather than its
spatial location. This class may also be referred to a an interdunal
wetland, shore fen, or herbaceous wetland. This zone would be influenced
by short-term fluctuations in Great Lakes water levels.

Common species include rushes (*Juncus balticus*, *J. pelocarpus*, *J.
nodosus*), spike rush (*Eleocharis acicularis*), threesquare (*Scripus
americanus*), twig-rush (*Cladium mariscoides*), sweet gale (*Myrica
gale*), shrubby cinquefoil (*Potentilla fruticosa*), blue-joint grass
(*Calamagrostis canadensis*), and Kalm\'s lobelia (*Lobelia kalmii*).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class C 27 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ --------------------- --------------------- -----------------
  PIBA2        Pinus banksiana       Jack pine             Upper

  JUCO6        Juniperus communis    Common juniper        Low-Mid

  PTAQ         Pteridium aquilinum   Western brackenfern   Lower

  PIRE         Pinus resinosa        Red pine              Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Low dune field and mid/late seral forested dune: On the landscape this
class would be located inland of the first series of dunes and swales.
This class is characterized by more advanced plant succession. A
replacement fire could convert this forested system to an open dune. A
mixed fire would maintain the system in this class.

In the low dune field common species include: Jack pine (*Pinus
banksiana*), white pine (*P. strobus*), and red pine (*P. resinosa*)
often forming a scattered overstory canopy, while ground juniper
(*Juniperus communis*), creeping juniper (*J. horizontalis*), bear berry
(*Arctostaphylos uva-ursi*), beach grass, and June grass (*Koeleria
macrantha*) form a scattered ground layer. The mid/late seral forested
dunes with soils of medium to course sand, tend to be dominated by
species common to dry-mesic and mesic northern forest (MNFI 1990). Soil
moisture conditions appear to change dramatically with slight
elevational changes and are reflected in the development of soil organic
material and changing plant species. On higher, drier ridges, soils
often have less than three cm of organic material. Red pine, white pine
and red oak (*Quercus rubra*) are often co-dominant, while paper birch
(*Betula papyrifera*), bigtooth aspen (*Populus grandidentata*), balsam
fir (*Abies balsamea*), and red maple are sub-dominant or understory
species. Bracken fern (*Pteridium aquilinum*), black huckleberry
(*Gaylussacia baccata*), blueberry (*Vaccinium myrtilloides*),
bunchberry (*Cornus canadensis*), and wintergreen (*Gaultheria
procumbens*) occur in the shrub and ground layers.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\" DBH

Class D 27 Late Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis        Arborvitae        Upper

  ACRU         Acer rubrum               Red maple         Lower

  ALINR        Alnus incana ssp. rugosa  Speckled alder    Upper

  CAREX        Carex                     Sedge             Mid-Upper
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mid/late seral swale: This class may range from shrub dominated to
forested swales.

A major hydrologic change, such as increased precipitation leading to
higher ground water levels or flooding may kill trees and shrubs,
converting this class to an open wetland swale.

Forested systems occur in dry or moist swales and are dominated by
northern white cedar (*Thuja occidentalis*), speckled alder (*Alnus
rugosa*), willows (*Salix* spp.), and red maple (*Acer rubrum*). In
swales with standing water present through most of the year, sedges
(*Carex aquatilis*) and (*C. stricta*), twigrush, marsh marigold
(*Caltha palustris*), swamp candles (*Lysimachia terrestris*) and swamp
cinquefoil (*Potentilla palustris*) commonly dominate the ground layer.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\" DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: short-term increase in Great Lakes water levels

Optional 2: short-term decrease in Great Lakes water levels

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Albert, D.A. 1995. Regional landscape ecosystems of MI, MN, and WI: A
working map and classification. USDA Forest Service, North Central
Forest Experiment Station.

Albert, D.A. and P.J. Comer. 1999. Natural community abstract for wooded
dune and swale complex. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing,
MI. 6 pp.

Chapman, K.A. 1986. Natural community description: Wooded dune and
swale. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 2 pp.

Chrzastowski, M.J. and T.A. Thompson. 1992. Late Wisconsinian and
Holocene coastal evolution of the southern shore of Lake Michigan. In:
Quaternary Coasts of the United States: Marine and Lacustrine Systems.
SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology) Special Publication No. 48:
398-413.

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Comer, P.J. and D.A. Albert. 1991. A Survey of Wooded Dune and Swale
Complexes in the Northern Lower and Eastern Upper Peninsulas of
Michigan. A report by the Michigan Natural Features Inventory to the
Coastal Management Program, Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 99
pp.

Comer, P.J. and D.A. Albert. 1993. A Survey of wooded dune and swale
complexes in Michigan. Report to Michigan DNR - Land and Water Mgmt.
Div., CZM Program. 159 pp.

Comer, P.J., D.A. Albert, H.A. Wells, B.L. Hart, J.B. Raab, D.L. Price,
D.M. Kashian, R.A. Corner and D.W. Schuen. 1995. Michigan's
Presettlement Vegetation, as Interpreted from the General Land Office
Surveys 1816-1856. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI.
Digital map.

Cowles, H.C. 1899. The ecological relations of the vegetation on the
sand dunes of Lake Michigan. Bot. Gaz. 27: 95-117, 167-202, 281-308,
361-396.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. Univ. of Wisc. Press,Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Dorr, J.A. and D.F. Eschman. 1970. Geology of Michigan. Univ. of Mich.
Press, Ann Arbor, MI. 476 pp.

Herman, K.D., M.R. Penskar, A.A. Reznicek, W.W. Brodowicz, G. Wilhelm
and L. Wetstein. 1994. The Michigan floristic quality assessment system
with wetland categories.

Homoya, M.A., D.B. Abrell, J.R. Aldrich and T.W. Post. 1985. The natural
regions of Indiana. IN Acad. Of Science. 94: 245-268.

Lichter, J. 1998. Primary succession and forest development on coastal
Lake Michigan sand dunes.Ecol. Monograph. 68(4): 487-510.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory. 1990. Draft description of Michigan
natural community types. Unpublished manuscript revised April 2, 1990.

Olson, J.S. 1958. Rates of succession and soil changes on southern Lake
Michigan sand dunes. Bot. Gaz. 119(3): 125-170.

Thompson, T.A. 1992. Beach-ridge development and lake-level variation in
southern Lake Michigan. Sedimentary Geol. 80: 305-318.

Wiedemann, A.M. 1992. Beach-ridge development and lake-level variation
in southern Lake Michigan. Sed. Geol. 80: 305-318.
