# 14710 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Central Interior and Appalachian Floodplain Systems {#central-interior-and-appalachian-floodplain-systems .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 3/27/2018

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                                     **Reviewers**   
  -------------- --------------------------------- --------------- ------------------------------
  Brad Slaughter slaughterb@michigan.gov           Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  Alan Tepley    tepleya@science.oregonstate.edu   Tim             tim.christiansen@us.army.mil
                                                   Christiansen    

  None           None                              Tom Arbour      Tom.Arbour@dnr.state.oh.us
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Mixed Upland and Wetland

Map Zones

51, 62

Geographic Range

This system is found along medium and large river floodplains over much
of the eastern United States on both glaciated and unglaciated
landscapes. This system is found in all subsections (Cleland et al.
2007) of map zone (MZ) 62 in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia:
222Ha, 222Hb, 221Eg, 221Ef, 221Ed, 221Ec, 221Eb, M221Ca, 221Ea, 221Fa,
221Fc, 221Fb, 222Ia, and 211Ga.

Biophysical Site Description

River valleys are linear depressions that contain a river channel and
its floodplain, often embedded within a series of higher terraces. The
river floodplain is the low-lying area adjacent to the river that was
formed under the present drainage system and is subject to periodic
flooding and cycles of erosion and deposition. In contrast, terraces are
former floodplain surfaces at higher elevations than the floodplain that
were abandoned when the river channel incised lower into the valley
floor. Within the broader landscape, river valleys represent an
unusually diverse mosaic of landforms, physical environmental factors,
species, and biological communities because of their abrupt
environmental gradients and complex ecological processes (Brinson 1990,
Gregory et al. 1991, Naiman et al. 1993). Floodplain forests occur along
streams or rivers that are third order or greater (Strahler 1952).

Vegetation Description

The variety of soil properties associated with this system can create a
mixture of vegetation. Many examples of this Biophysical Setting (BpS)
in map zone (MZ) 62 are dominated by silver maple (*Acer saccharinum*),
associated with red maple (*A. rubrum*), box-elder (*Acer negundo*),
green ash (*Fraxinus pennsylvanica*), black willow (*Salix nigra*),
American elm (*Ulmus americana*), red elm (*U. rubra*), sycamore
(*Platanus occidentalis*), black walnut (*Juglans nigra*), cottonwood
(*Populus deltoides*), Ohio buckeye (*Aesculus glabra*), and, locally,
river birch (*Betula nigra*). Silver maple-dominated occurrences
typically occupy broad, well-defined floodplains of large rivers.
Understory species can vary across the range of this system but can
include shrubs such as silky dogwood (*Cornus amomum*), gray dogwood
(*Cornus racemosa*), spicebush (*Lindera benzoin*), poison-ivy
(*Toxicodendron radicans*), southern arrow-wood (*Viburnum recognitum*),
trees such as paw-paw (*Asimina triloba*), and numerous sedges, grasses,
forbs, and ferns. Oxbows and open swales may be dominated by dominated
by non-woody vegetation (Andreas 1989, Hardin et al. 1989, Fike 1999).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ACSA2        *Acer saccharinum*               Silver maple

  ACRU         *Acer rubrum*                    Red maple

  SANI         *Salix nigra*                    Black willow

  ULRU         *Ulmus rubra*                    Slippery elm

  PLOC         *Platanus occidentalis*          American sycamore

  FRPE         *Fraxinus pennsylvanica*         Green ash

  PODE3        *Populus deltoides*              Eastern cottonwood

  ACNE2        *Acer negundo*                   Boxelder
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Floodplain systems are produced and maintained by active hydrologic and
geomorphic processes such as channel meandering, sedimentation and
erosion (Gregory, et al. 1991, Hughes 1994) caused by natural
hydrological variation (Richter and Richter 2000). Regeneration of the
early successional dominant species (cottonwood, maple, and willow) is
dependent on flooding and movement of river channels, which creates
bare, moist soil needed for seedling establishment (Noble 1979, Johnson
et al. 1976, Scott et al. 1997). Oxbow and slough development also
influence the floodplain system and create variability in plant
community composition. Deposits of sand and other sediments can create
low ridges that influence vegetation establishment (Weaver 1960). The
flood frequency in a given area is dependent upon its location on the
floodplain, with upper terraces having infrequent flooding and scouring
events, while the lower terraces nearest the river flood frequently.
Scouring caused by ice jams during the winter, channel meandering, and
oxbow and slough development greatly influence this system.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Considerations

Patches must be adequate in size to contain natural variation in
vegetation and disturbance regime. This system is often widespread on
medium or larger rivers and should be at least 0.5 miles long and 100m
wide.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Today, bank stabilization, dams, and water diversion have significantly
altered these floodplains.

Pollution and heavy metals may be an issue in this BpS due modern waste
water issues and the flooding nature of this system.

Issues or Problems

Assumptions: This system is most affected by flooding, scouring, and
channel movement. We modeled the floodplain valley including forested
and non-forested areas. The model does include wetlands, sloughs or
oxbows. We used two flooding regimes in the model: Option 1 -- minor
flooding/scouring; and Option 2 -- major flooding/scouring. Flood
frequency for a class is based on location on the floodplain, with
higher terraces being subject to longer flood cycles. We modeled
attributes such as channel migration, oxbow and slough development, and
sedimentation. Fire activity had a minor impact, due to low intensity,
infrequent intervals, small size, and low fuel loads.

Current Conditions

Comments

This model adapted from Model 5114710 by Jim Drake
(jim_drake@natureserve.org) and Alan Tepley (tepleya@onid.orst.edu) on
10/15/2007, which was adapted from Rapid Assessment (RA) model R6FPFOgl
Great Lakes Floodplain Forest by Robert Mayer (rmayer@fs.fed.us) and
Rick Miller (rick.miller@dnr.state.oh.us) on 09/30/2005. Material from
the Michigan Natural Features Inventory community abstract for
Floodplains (Tepley et al. 2004) is also incorporated.

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 15 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                         Position**
  ------------ ------------------- --------------------- ------------------
  PODE3        Populus deltoides   Eastern cottonwood    Upper

  SALIX        Salix               Willow                Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Early successional stage created by scouring and deposition following
seasonal flooding and stream meander changes (Optional 1 in model). A
mix of pioneer tree seedlings, shrubs (often willows), and herbaceous
primary succession. Rare surface fires.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\"DBH

Class B 23 Mid Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ --------------------- -------------------- -----------------
  SALIX        Salix                 Willow               Mid-Upper

  PLOC         Platanus occidentalis American sycamore    Upper

  PODE3        Populus deltoides     Eastern cottonwood   Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This stage develops as the stand starts to mature. These are low
diversity stands dominated by cottonwood, willow (sandbar, peach-leaved,
black), and sycamore.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\"DBH

Class C 44 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ --------------------- -------------------- -----------------
  PLOC         Platanus occidentalis American sycamore    Upper

  PODE3        Populus deltoides     Eastern cottonwood   Upper

  ACNE2        Acer negundo          Boxelder             Upper

  ACSA2        Acer saccharinum      Silver maple         Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mixed canopy. Overstory is dominated by a mix of cottonwood, American
elm, silver maple, box elder, red maple, and sycamore. Vines and poison
ivy are abundant in the understory.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 18 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ----------------- ------------------
  ACSA2        Acer saccharinum         Silver maple      Upper

  JUNI         Juglans nigra            Black walnut      Upper

  FRPE         Fraxinus pennsylvanica   Green ash         Upper

  QUPA2        Quercus palustris        Pin oak           Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Found along upper terraces or areas protected from frequent flooding.
Species diversity increases towards the south and east within the
region. Overstory species include hackberry, American elm, ash (green
and black), sycamore, black walnut, shagbark hickory, oak (bur, swamp,
white), basswood, tulip poplar, and maple (red & silver). Understory
cover is often higher than in other classes in this model. Shrubs and
small trees such as *Lindera benzoin, Carpinus caroliniana, Cercis
canadensis, Cornus* spp. And *Prunus virginiana* are typical.

.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: Minor Flooding

Optional 2: Major Flooding

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Andreas, B.K. 1989. The vascular flora of the glaciated Allegheny
Plateau region of Ohio. Ohio Biol. Surv. Bull. NS. 8(1). 191 pp.

Brinson, M.M. 1990. Riverine forests. Pp. 87-141 in D. Goodall, A. Lugo,
M. Brinson and S. Brown (eds.), Ecosystems of the World, Forested
Wetlands, Vol. 15.

Elsevier, New York. 527 pp.

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale
1:3,500,000; colored

Fike, J. 1999. Terrestrial and palustrine plant communities of
Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources, Bureau of Forestry, Harrisburg, PA.

Forest Cover Types of the United States and Canada, SAF 1980. Eyre, F.H.
ed. 148 pp.

Gregory, S.V., F.J. Swanson, W.A. McKee and K.W. Cummins. 1991. An
ecosystem perspective of riparian zones. Bioscience 41:540-551.

Hardin, E.D., K.P. Lewis and W.A. Wistendahl. 1989. Gradient analysis of
floodplain forests along three rivers in unglaciated Ohio. Journal of
the Torrey Botanical Club 116:258-264.

Hughes, F.M.R. 1994. Environmental change, disturbance and regeneration
in semi-arid floodplain forests. In: A.C. Millington and K. Pye,
Editors, Environmental Change in Drylands: Biogeographical and
Geomorphological Perspectives, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
321--345pp.

Johnson, W.C., R.L. Burgess and W.R. Keammerer. 1976. Forest overstory
vegetation and environment on the Missouri River floodplain in North
Dakota. Ecological Monographs 46:59-84.

Mack, J.J. 2004. Integrated Wetland Assessment Program. Part 2: an
ordination and classification of wetlands in the Till and Lake Plains
and Allegheny Plateau regions. Ohio EPA Technical Report WET/2004-2.
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, Wetland Ecology Group, Division of
Surface Water, Columbus, OH.

Naiman, R.J., H. Decamps and M. Pollock. 1993. The role of riparian
corridors in maintaining regional biodiversity. Ecological Applications
3:209--212.

NatureServe. 2007. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA. Data current as of 10 February 2007.

Noble, M.G. 1979. The origin of Populus deltoides and Salix interior
zones on point bars along the Minnesota River. American Midland
Naturalist 102(1):59-67.

Richter, B.D. and H.E. Richter. 2000. Prescribing flood regimes to
sustain riparian ecosystems along meandering rivers. Conservation
Biology 14:1467-1478.

Scott, M. L., G. T. Auble and J. M. Friedman. 1997. Flood dependency of
cottonwood establishment along the Missouri River, Montana, USA.
Ecological Applications 7:677-690.

Strahler, A.N. 1952. Dynamic Basis of Geomorphology. Geological Society
of America Bulletin 63:923-938.

Tepley, A.J., J.G. Cohen and L. Huberty. 2004. Natural community
abstract for southern floodplain forest. Michigan Natural Features
Inventory, Lansing, MI. 14 pp.

Weaver, J. E. 1960. Flood plain vegetation of the central Missouri
Valley and contacts of woodland with prairie. Ecological Monographs
30(1):37-64.
