# 14750 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Laurentian-Acadian Floodplain Systems {#laurentian-acadian-floodplain-systems .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                               **Reviewers**   
  -------------- --------------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Jim Drake      jim_drake@natureserve.org   Chris Dunham    cdunham@tnc.org

  Alan Tepley    tepleya@onid.orst.edu       Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

                                                             
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Mixed Upland and Wetland

Map Zones

41, 50, 51, 63, 64, 65, 66

Geographic Range

This systems group occurs across the glaciated Northeast from New
England, NY, and New Brunswick west to MN (NatureServe 2007).

Biophysical Site Description

River valleys are linear depressions that contain a river channel and
its floodplain, often embedded within a series of higher terraces. River
valleys, formed by the meltwater of glaciers, occur in glacial outwash
channels. The river floodplain is the low-lying area adjacent to the
river that was formed under the present drainage system and is subject
to periodic flooding and cycles of erosion and deposition. In contrast,
terraces are former floodplain surfaces at higher elevations than the
floodplain that were abandoned when the river channel incised lower into
the valley floor. Within the broader landscape, river valleys represent
an unusually diverse mosaic of landforms, physical environmental
factors, species, and biological communities because of their abrupt
environmental gradients and complex ecological processes (Naiman et al.
1993, Gregory et al. 1991, Brinson 1990). Floodplain forests occur along
streams or rivers that are third order or greater (Strahler 1952).

Vegetation Description

This complex includes floodplain forests, with *Acer saccharinum*
characteristic, as well as herbaceous sloughs and shrub wetlands. Most
areas are underwater each spring; microtopography determines how long
the various habitats are inundated. Associated trees include *Acer
rubrum* and *Carpinus caroliniana*, the latter frequent but never
abundant. On terraces or in more calcareous areas, *Acer saccharum* or
*Quercus rubra* may be locally prominent, with *Betula alleghaniensis*
and *Fraxinus* spp. *Salix nigra* is characteristic of the levees
adjacent to the channel. Common shrubs include *Cornus amomum* and
*Viburnum* spp. The herb layer in the forested portions often features
abundant spring ephemerals, giving way to a fern-dominated understory in
many areas by mid-summer. Non-forested wetlands associated with these
systems include shrub-dominated and graminoid-herbaceous vegetation.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ACSA2        *Acer saccharinum*               Silver maple

  FRPE         *Fraxinus pennsylvanica*         Green ash

  CEOC         *Celtis occidentalis*            Common hackberry

  ULAM         *Ulmus americana*                American elm

  ACNEI2       *Acer negundo var. interius*     Boxelder

  FRNI         *Fraxinus nigra*                 Black ash
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Floodplain systems are produced and maintained by active hydrologic and
geomorphic processes such as channel meandering, sedimentation and
erosion (Gregory, et al. 1991, Hughes 1994) caused by natural
hydrological variation (Richter and Richter 2000). Regeneration of the
dominant species (silver maple and willow) is dependent on flooding and
movement of river channels, which creates bare, moist soil needed for
seedling establishment (Scott et al. 1997). Oxbow and slough development
also influence the floodplain system and create variability in plant
community composition. Deposits of sand and other sediments can create
low ridges that influence vegetation establishment (Weaver 1960). The
flood frequency in a given area is dependent upon its location on the
floodplain, with upper terraces having infrequent flooding and scouring
events, while the lower terraces nearest the river flood frequently.
Scouring caused by ice jams during the winter, channel meandering, and
oxbow and slough development greatly influence this system.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

Patches must be adequate in size to contain natural variation in
vegetation and disturbance regime. This system is often widespread on
medium or larger rivers and should be at least 0.5 miles long and 100m
wide.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Today, bank stabilization, dams, and water diversion have significantly
altered these floodplains.

Issues or Problems

Assumptions: This system is most affected by flooding, scouring, and
channel movement. We modeled the floodplain valley including forested
and non-forested areas. The model does include wetlands, sloughs or
oxbows. We used two flooding regimes in the model: Option 1 -- minor
flooding/scouring (two to 20yr frequency); and Option 2 -- major
flooding/scouring (20-100yr frequency). Flood frequency for a class is
based on location on the floodplain, with higher terraces being subject
to longer flood cycles (up to 100yrs). We modeled attributes such as
channel migration, oxbow and slough development, and sedimentation. Fire
activity had a minor impact, due to low intensity, infrequent intervals,
small size, and low fuel loads.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 16 Early Development 1 - All Structures

DBH

Indicator Species

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**     **Canopy Position**
  ------------ ------------------- ------------------- --------------------
  ALIN2        Alnus incana        Gray alder          Upper

  SALIX        Salix               Willow              Upper
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Early successional stage created by scouring and deposition following
seasonal flooding and stream meander changes. A mix of pioneer shrubs
(usually alders and willows), and herbaceous species.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\" DBH

Class B 23 Mid Development 1 - Open

DBH

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ----------------- ------------------
  ACSA2        Acer saccharinum         Silver maple      Upper

  FRPE         Fraxinus pennsylvanica   Green ash         Upper

  FRNI         Fraxinus nigra           Black ash         Upper

  SALIX        Salix                    Willow            Mid-Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This stage develops as the stand starts to mature. Low diversity stands.
Dominant species are willow (sandbar, peach-leaved), green ash, black
ash, and silver maple.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Sapling \>4.5ft; \<5\" DBH

Class C 44 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ----------------- ------------------
  ACSA2        Acer saccharinum         Silver maple      Upper

  ACRU         Acer rubrum              Red maple         Upper

  FRPE         Fraxinus pennsylvanica   Green ash         Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mixed canopy composition. Overstory is dominated by a mix of American
elm, silver maple, box elder, red maple, green ash, and sometimes
conifers such as hemlock, white cedar, and white pine.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

Class D 17 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**  **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ -------------------- --------------------- ------------------
  ACSA2        Acer saccharinum     Silver maple          Upper

  TIAM         Tilia americana      American basswood     Upper

  QURU         Quercus rubra        Northern red oak      Upper

  CEOC         Celtis occidentalis  Common hackberry      Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Found along upper terraces or areas protected from frequent flooding.
Species diversity increases towards the south and east within the
region. Overstory species include basswood, white pine, red oak,
hackberry, hemlock, and sugar maple. Understory cover is often higher
than in other classes in this model.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\" DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: Minor Flooding 5-20 yr.

Optional 2: Minor Flooding 20-500 yr.

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Brinson, M.M. 1990. Riverine forests.87-141. In: Goodall, D., A. Lugo,
M. Brinson and S. Brown, eds. Ecosystems of the World, Forested
Wetlands, Vol. 15.

Elsevier, NY. 527 pp.

Forest Cover Types of the United States and Canada, SAF 1980. Eyre,
F.H., ed. 148 pp.

Gregory, S.V., F.J. Swanson, W.A. McKee and K.W. Cummins. 1991. An
ecosystem perspective of riparian zones. Bioscience 41:540-551.

Hughes, F.M.R. 1994. Environmental change, disturbance and regeneration
in semi-arid floodplain forests. In: A.C. Millington and K. Pye,
Editors, Environmental Change in Drylands: Biogeographical and
Geomorphological Perspectives, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
321-345.

Naiman, R.J., H. Decamps and Pollock, M. 1993. The role of riparian
corridors in maintaining regional biodiversity. Ecological Applications
3:209--212.

NatureServe. 2007. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA, USA. Data current as of 15 April 2007.

Richter, B.D. and H.E. Richter. 2000. Prescribing flood regimes to
sustain riparian ecosystems along meandering rivers. Conservation
Biology 14:1467-1478.

Scott, M.L., G.T. Auble and J.M. Friedman. 1997. Flood dependency of
cottonwood establishment along the Missouri River, Montana, USA.
Ecological Applications 7:677--690.

Strahler, A.N. 1952. Dynamic Basis of Geomorphology. Geological Society
of America Bulletin 63:923-938.

Tepley, A.J., J.G. Cohen and L. Huberty. 2004. Natural community
abstract for southern floodplain forest. Michigan Natural Features
Inventory, Lansing, MI. 14 pp.

Weaver, J. E. 1960. Flood plain vegetation of the central Missouri
Valley and contacts of woodland with prairie. Ecological Monographs
30(1):37-64.
