# 14790 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Central Interior and Appalachian Swamp Systems {#central-interior-and-appalachian-swamp-systems .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                              **Reviewers**   
  --------------- ------------------------- --------------- --------------------
  Brad Slaughter  slaughterb@michigan.gov   Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  Becky Schillo   schillo@michigan.gov      None            None

  None            None                      None            None
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Woody Wetland

Map Zones

41, 42, 47, 48, 50, 51, 53

Geographic Range

These wetlands are scattered throughout the north-central midwest (south
of the Laurentian region) the north-central Appalachians and southern
New England at low to mid elevations. In MZ51 the system is found in
subsection 251Dh, and throughout all subsections of 222J and 222U. In
MZ50 the system in found throughout 222ke, Kf and Kg.

Biophysical Site Description

Central Interior and Appalachian Swamp Systems can be found in several
landscapes. Some swamp systems are found in surface-water depressions
where the vegetation is separated from the water-table and the hydrology
is driven by surface water. This type of system is found commonly over
clay where there would be a perched water table. These sites experience
significant seasonal hydrologic fluctuation, with the water table
typically above the soil surface in spring and significantly below the
surface during summer. Forested wetlands primarily impacted by surface
water are common over broad areas of glacial lakeplain. Also swamp
systems are found in ground-water depressions where groundwater is
influencing the hydrology of the system. This type of system would be
found over a coarse-textured soil substrate. These sites experience less
hydrologic fluctuation than the surface-water depressional sites, and
typically occupy relatively small areas relative to surface water
influenced sites (Mitsch and Gosselink 2000).

Vegetation Description

This system is comprised of a variety of lowland hardwoods, including
silver maple (Acer saccharinum), red maple (Acer rubrum), green ash
(Fraxinus pennsylvanica), black ash (Fraxinus nigra), American elm
(Ulmus americana), pin oak (Quercus palustris), swamp white oak (Quercus
bicolor), sycamore (Platanus occidentalis), cottonwood (Populus
deltoides) and a variety of other canopy associates. Silver maple, green
ash, sycamore and cottonwood favor sites that experience seasonal
inundation, whereas black ash favors organic deposits that are not
subject to extreme hydrologic fluctuations. Stands are generally
closed-canopy. Shrub and groundlayer diversity depends on canopy closure
and hydrology, but is generally low on seasonally inundated sites.
Hummocks, canopy openings and decomposing wood support higher diversity.
Stands referred to as \"flatwoods\" range from wet to mesic, with
species composition changing accordingly. Flatwoods on relatively dry
substrate may be dominated by sugar maple (Acer saccharum), oaks and
occasionally beech (Fagus grandifolia).

Typical ground layer species may occur Onoclea sensibilis (sensitive
fern), Osmunda cinnamomea (cinnamon fern), Osmunda regalis (royal fern),
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage) Toxiodendron radicans (poison
ivy), Parthenocissus quinquefolia (Virginia creeper), Caltha palustris
(marsh-marigold), Glyceria striata (manna grass) and Lycopus spp.
(water-horehound).

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ACSA2        *Acer saccharinum*               Silver maple

  ACRU         *Acer rubrum*                    Red maple

  FRPE         *Fraxinus pennsylvanica*         Green ash

  FRNI         *Fraxinus nigra*                 Black ash

  QUPA2        *Quercus palustris*              Pin oak

  PLOC         *Platanus occidentalis*          American sycamore

  QUBI         *Quercus bicolor*                Swamp white oak

  ULAM         *Ulmus americana*                American elm
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

The dominant disturbance in this BpS is seasonal water table
fluctuation, leading to varying periods of inundation. Spring flooding
restricts seed germination and diversity of shrubs and ground layer
species. Summer drought is an additional stressor. Shallowly rooted
trees are subject to windthrow, but are typically rooted in mineral
soils, which have greater structural stability than organic soils.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

This system typically occurs as small to large patches, the largest
patches occurring on glacial clay and sand-clay lakeplain.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

This system commonly occurs as small to large patches in a matrix of
fire-resistant systems, including beech-maple forest, and sometimes
associated with fire-adapted systems, including oak savanna. This system
is often referred to as ash, red maple or maple-ash-oak swamp (the
latter particularly in OH). The majority of pre-European settlement
acreage has been drained and converted to agriculture. Structure of
remaining sites may be simplified by anthropogenic disturbances,
including hydrologic alteration, grazing and introduction of invasive
species. Invasive species occurring in this system include glossy
buckthorn (Rhamnus frangula), garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata),
Japanese barberry (Berberis thunbergii) and multiflora rose (Rosa
multiflora). Also the introduction of Dutch elm disease into North
American forests has largely elimated large elms from native ecosystems.

Issues or Problems

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Strong dominance by red maple may indicate previous disturbance (grazing
or pasturing, hydrologic alteration, beaver flooding, etc.).

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 24 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                             Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ -------------------- ----------------
  CEOC2        Cephalanthus             Common buttonbush    Low-Mid
               occidentalis                                  

  CORU         Cornus rugosa            Roundleaf dogwood    Low-Mid

  ILVE         Ilex verticillata        Common winterberry   Low-Mid

  COAM2        Cornus amomum            Silky dogwood        Low-Mid
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This stage is an early successional stand following flooding or a rare
stand-replacing fire. Shrubs increase in dominance over time, although
open grass- and sedge-dominated wet meadow may be dominant for the first
10yrs+, particularly in areas in which existing shrubs were
flood-killed. Open to dense thicket dominated by species such as Ilex
verticillata (winterberry), Vaccinium corymbosum (highbush blueberry),
Lindera benzoin (spicebush), Viburnum spp., Alnus rugosa (speckled
alder) Cephalanthus occidentalis (buttonbush), Corylus cornuta
(hazelnut), Salix spp.(willows) and Cornus spp. (dogwoods).

This stage results from major disturbance, including stand-replacement
fire, flooding, or windthrow. Rare replacement firesand catastrophic
windthrow can maintain the system in Early 1 All (an early shrub-herb-
dominated successional stage). Flooding caused by beaver or other
natural hydrologic alteration is estimated to occur every 300yrs,
although this number may be much higher, and will also maintain the
system in this class. Shrub thickets are sometimes relatively stable and
long-persistent, but the concept used for this model is of a site that,
due to edaphic factors, favors the development of forested wetland in
the absence of major disturbance(s). As with all stages of this system,
seasonal annual spring flooding, would occur. This natural process was
not explicitly modeled but it should be assumed that it is occurring
annually and maintaining the swamp forest instead of allowing it to
succeed to drier forest type.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 36 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**   **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ----------------- ------------------
  ACRU         Acer rubrum              Red maple         Upper

  ACSA2        Acer saccharinum         Silver maple      Upper

  FRPE         Fraxinus pennsylvanica   Green ash         Upper

  FRNI         Fraxinus nigra           Black ash         Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mid-development forested swamp stage. Scattered tree canopy develops
from seedlings that establish under shrubs. Typical species include
silver maple (Acer saccharinum), red maple (Acer rubrum), green ash
(Fraxinus pennsylvanica), black ash (Fraxinus nigra), American elm
(Ulmus americana), pin oak (Quercus palustris), swamp white oak (Quercus
bicolor), sycamore (Platanus occidentalis), cottonwood (Populus
deltoides) and a variety of other canopy associates. General appearance
is of a shrub-dominated system with an open tree canopy, grading into
forested wetland at the end of this period.

As with all stages of this system, seasonal annual spring flooding,
would occur. This natural process was not explicitly modeled but it
should be assumed that it is occurring annually and maintaining the
swamp forest instead of allowing it to succeed to drier forest type.

This stage transitions to Late Development Closed in the absence of
major disturbance(s). Replacement fires were estimated to occur every
1000yrs; this likely varied across the region and depending on the
nature of the upland matrix in any given area (fire-dependent vs.
fire-intolerant). Replacement fires return the system to Early 1 All
successional stage. Flooding caused by beaver or other natural
hydrologic alteration is estimated to occur every 300yrs, although this
number may be much higher, and will return the system to Early 1 All.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Large 21-33\"DBH

Class C 40 Late Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**   **Common Name**           **Canopy
                                                               Position**
  ------------ --------------------- ------------------------- ---------------
  ACRU         Acer rubrum           Red maple                 Upper

  ASCA2        Asarum caudatum       British columbia          Upper
                                     wildginger                

  FRPE         Fraxinus              Green ash                 Upper
               pennsylvanica                                   

  FRNI         Fraxinus nigra        Black ash                 Upper
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Mature forested swamp: Mature, multi-seral stands aged 80yrs+ This stage
is dominated by the same tree species as Mid Development 1 Closed class
B although the shrub layer is greatly reduced.

This stage is maintained by frequent windthrow of single trees or small
to large patches of trees, modeled with the probability of occurring
every 100yrs. Replacement fires were estimated to occur every
700-1000yrs; this likely varied across the region and depending on the
nature of the upland matrix in any given area (fire-dependent vs.
fire-intolerant). Replacement fires return the system to class A (an
early shrub- (herb-) dominated successional stage. Catastrophic
windthrow was estimated to occur every 600yrs and would also return the
system to Early 1 All. Flooding caused by beaver or other natural
hydrologic alteration is estimated to occur every 300yrs, although this
number may be much higher, and will return the system to Early 1 All.

As with all stages of this system, seasonal annual spring flooding,
would occur. This natural process was not explicitly modeled but it
should be assumed that it is occurring annually and maintaining the
swamp forest instead of allowing it to succeed to drier forest type.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Very Large \>33\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Mitsch, W.J. and J.G. Gosselink, eds. 2000. Wetlands: Third Edition.
John Wiley and Sons, New York.

NatureServe. 2007. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA. Data current as of 10 February 2007.
