# 14920 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Great Lakes Coastal Marsh Systems {#great-lakes-coastal-marsh-systems .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                             **Reviewers**   
  -------------- ------------------------- --------------- ------------------------------
  Becky Schillo  schillor@michigan.gov     Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

  Brad Slaughter slaughterb@michigan.gov   Tim             tim.christiansen@us.army.mil
                                           Christiansen    

  None           None                      None            None
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Reviewed by:** Tim Christiansen

Vegetation Type

Herbaceous Wetland

Map Zones

41, 50, 51, 52, 63

Geographic Range

Great Lakes Coastal Marsh Systems are found throughout the northern
Great Lakes Basin in the United States and Canada from New York west to
Minnesota (NatureServe 2007).

Biophysical Site Description

Great Lakes marshes are found along the shoreline of the Great Lakes.
Glacial landforms, in combination with recent longshore transport
processes, create the prevalent physiographic features along much of the
Great Lakes shoreline. Their characteristic differences in substrate,
soils, slope, and drainage conditions largely determine both natural
shoreline configuration and sediment composition. These, in turn,
generate distinctive contexts for wetland development that vary in their
exposure and resilience to lake processes and in their floristic
composition.

Vegetation Description

Abiotic variables such as aquatic system, water-level fluctuations,
surficial bedrock, glacial landform, and climate combine to determine
the species composition and floristic quality of Great Lakes coastal
wetlands. In general, Great Lakes marshes are dominated by graminoids
such as *Schoenoplectis acutus*, *Schoenoplectis pungens*, *Eleocharis
palustris*, *Juncus balticus*, *Carex lacustris*, and *Eleocharis
rostellata*. In protected areas, algal precipitation of calcium
carbonate forms marly mats that support calcium-loving plants.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  SCPU10       *Schoenoplectus pungens*         Common threesquare

  SCAC3        *Schoenoplectus acutus*          Hardstem bulrush

  JUBA         *Juncus balticus*                Baltic rush

  TYLA         *Typha latifolia*                Broadleaf cattail

  CACA4        *Calamagrostis canadensis*       Bluejoint

  CALA16       *Carex lacustris*                Hairy sedge

  ELRO2        *Eleocharis rostellata*          Beaked spikerush

  DAFL3        *Dasiphora floribunda*           Shrubby cinquefoil
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

Fluctuations in water levels are one of the most important influences on
Great Lakes wetlands. These fluctuations occur over three temporal
scales: 1) short-term fluctuations (seiche) in water level caused by
persistent winds and/or differences in barometric pressure; 2) seasonal
fluctuations reflecting the annual hydrologic cycle in the Great Lakes
basin; and 3) interannual fluctuations in lake level as a result of
variable precipitation and evaporation within their drainage basins
(Minc 1997; Minc and Albert 1998). All of these scales contribute to the
dynamic character of coastal wetlands, although interannual fluctuations
result in the greatest wetland variability. These extreme lake-level
fluctuations can range from 3.5-6.5ft (1.3-2.5m) and occur with no
regular periodicity. In general, as water levels rise and fall,
vegetation communities shift landward during high-water years and
lakeward during low-water years. However, fluctuating lake levels effect
not only a change in water depth but also a broad range of associated
stresses to which plants must respond, including changes in water
current, wave action, turbidity (clarity or light penetration), nutrient
content or availability, alkalinity, and temperature, as well as ice
scour and sediment displacement. Since individual species display
different tolerance limits along one or more of these dimensions,
species composition can also change dramatically within a zone. Coastal
wetland systems are adapted to and require periodic inundation.

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

This system can be a linear system occurring along the Great Lakes or a
small-medium patch system found at deltas.

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

Water-level regulation has significantly reduced the occurrence of
extreme high and low water levels on Lake Ontario and to a lesser degree
on Lake Superior. This disruption of the natural cycle favors species
intolerant of water-depth change, excludes species requiring periodic
exposure of fertile substrates, and potentially leads to a reduction of
species diversity. The dominance of cattails in many Lake Ontario
marshes suggests a trend toward reduced species diversity following a
reduction in the amplitude of natural water-level fluctuations (Wilcox
et al. 1993).

Both urban and agricultural development have resulted in severe
degradation and loss of coastal marshes through pollution, land
management, and ecosystem alteration. Urban development has impacted
coastal wetlands in the following ways:

-   Armoring of the shoreline and dredging of channels to create harbors
    has resulted in marsh elimination.

-   Dumping of waste materials, such as sawdust and sewage and a wide
    variety of chemicals, has mechanically and chemically altered the
    shallow-water marsh environment, increasing turbidity, reducing
    oxygen concentrations, and altering the pH.

-   Shipping traffic has mechanically eroded shoreline vegetation.

Water-level control of the Great Lakes and connecting rivers has altered
natural wetland dynamics. Agriculture has had the following impacts on
coastal wetlands:

-   Drainage has eliminated large areas of marshes and coastal wetlands.

-   Sedimentation has greatly increased turbidity, eliminating
    submergent species requiring clear water.

-   Nutrient loading has locally reduced oxygen levels, prompted algal
    blooms, and led to the dominance of high-nutrient tolerant species
    such as cattails.

-   Heavy agricultural sedimentation has led to the deposition of rich
    organic mud in the wet meadows and along the shoreline, favoring the
    dominance of early successional species.

-   Introduction of exotic plants has altered macrophyte species
    composition.

Several exotic plants and animals pose a threat to the integrity of
coastal wetlands. Exotics often outcompete native organisms, as well as
altering their habitat (Hart et al. 2000). Significant exotic plants
include *Lythrum salicaria*, *Phragmites australis*, *Phalaris
arundinacea*, *Myriophyllum spicatum* (*Eurasian milfoil*), *Potamogeton
crispus* (curly-leaf pondweed), and many less aggressive species.
*Hydrocharis moris-ranae*, an aggressive floating-leaved plant, is
expanding westward from the St. Lawrence River and Lake Ontario into
Lake Erie and the Detroit River and has recently been documented in
Michigan.

Exotic animals include *Dreissena polymorpha* (zebra mussel), *Cyprinus
carpio* (common carp), *Neogobius* spp. (gobies), and *Bythotrephes
cederstroemi* (spiny water flea), to name but a few. Many exotics arrive
in shipping ballast, and many others were purposefully introduced.

Issues or Problems

This description and models cover a range of vegetation types including
shore fens, marshes, and estuaries.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 22 Early Development 1 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**     **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                             Position**
  ------------ ----------------------- --------------------- ----------------
  PORI2        Potamogeton             Richardson\'s         Lower
               richardsonii            pondweed              

  HEDU2        Heteranthera dubia      Grassleaf mudplantain Lower

  VAAM3        Vallisneria americana   American eelgrass     Lower

  POOB2        Potamogeton             Bluntleaf pondweed    Lower
               obtusifolius                                  
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Submergent marsh: *Heteranthera dubia*, *Miriophylium exalbescens*,
*Potamogeton obtusifolius*, *Potamogeton richardsonii*, *Vallisneria
americana*.

With a decrease in Great Lakes water levels, modeled using the optional
1.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 22 Early Development 2 - All Structures

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**     **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                           Position**
  ------------ ----------------------- ------------------- -----------------
  TYLA         Typha latifolia         Broadleaf cattail   Low-Mid

  SCAC3        Schoenoplectus acutus   Hardstem bulrush    Lower

  JUBA         Juncus balticus         Baltic rush         Low-Mid

  VAAM3        Vallisneria americana   American eelgrass   Lower
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Emergent marsh: *Chara globularis*, *Najas flexilis*, *Nymphaea
odorata*, *Potamogeton odorata*, *Potamogeton graminieus*, *Scripus
acutus*, *Vallisneria americana*.

With a decrease in Great Lakes water levels, modeled using the optional
1.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class C 56 Mid Development 1 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**       **Common Name**    **Canopy
                                                            Position**
  ------------ ------------------------- ------------------ -----------------
  CACA4        Calamagrostis canadensis  Bluejoint          Lower

  ALIN2        Alnus incana              Gray alder         Middle

  ELRO2        Eleocharis rostellata     Beaked spikerush   Low-Mid

  CALA16       Carex lacustris           Hairy sedge        Lower
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Shrub swamp/wet meadow/shore fen: *Alnus rugosa*, *Calamagrostis
canadensis*, *Carex lacustris*, *Carex stricta*, *Scutellaria
galericulata*, *Typha latifolia*, *Potentialla fruticosa*, *Eleocharis
rostellata*.

A significant increase in Great Lakes water levels, modeled using the
optional 2.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: Decline in Great Lakes water levels

Optional 2: Increase in Great Lakes water levels

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Albert, D.A. 2001. Natural community abstract for Great Lakes marsh.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory. Lansing, MI. 11 pp.

Minc, L.D. 1997. Vegetative Response in Michigan\'s Great Lakes Marshes
to Great Lakes Water-Level Fluctuations. A Report Submitted to Michigan
Natural Features

Inventory, April, 1997. Funded by EPA Great Lakes National Program
Office (Federal Grant GL9 95810-02), through The Nature Conservancy\'s
Great Lakes Program

Office. 135 pp.

Minc, L.D. and D.A. Albert. 1998. Great Lakes Coastal Wetlands: Abiotic
and Floristic Characterization. Michigan Natural Features Inventory. 36
pp.

NatureServe. 2007. International Ecological classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA, USA. Data current as of 15 April 2007.

Wilcox, D.A., J.E. Meeker and J. Elias. 1993. Impacts of Water-Level
Regulation on Wetlands of the Great Lakes. Phase 2 Report to Working
Committee 2, International

Joint Commission, Great Lakes Water Level Reference Study, Natural
Resources Task Group.
