# 14940 {#section .BpS_Title}

# Laurentian-Acadian Shrub-Herbaceous Wetland Systems {#laurentian-acadian-shrub-herbaceous-wetland-systems .BpS_Title}

BpS Model/Description Version: Aug. 2020

Update: 6/22/2018

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Modelers**                         **Reviewers**   
  ----------------- ------------------ --------------- --------------------
  Michael A. Kost   kostmi@msu.edu     Dave Cleland    dcleland@fs.fed.us

                                                       

                                                       
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vegetation Type

Herbaceous Wetland

Map Zones

41, 50, 51

Geographic Range

These systems occur throughout the upper Great Lakes region in Ontario,
Canada, and Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. In map zones (MZ)s 41,
50, and 51, it occurs throughout Section 212 (Cleland et al. 2007).

Biophysical Site Description

These systems occur on glacial lakebeds, in channels of glacial outwash,
and in depressions on glacial outwash and moraines (NatureServe 2005a,
NatureServe 2005b, Hoffman 2002, Faber-Langendoen 2001, Reuter 1986,
Curtis 1959). They frequently occur along the margins of lakes, ponds
and streams where seasonal flooding or beaver-induced flooding is common
(Hoffman 2002, Reuter 1986, Curtis 1959).

These systems typically occur on organic soil such as well-decomposed
sapric peat (Curtis 1959) but saturated mineral soil may also support
these systems (NatureServe 2005a, Hoffman 2002, Faber-Langendoen 2001,
Curtis 1959) Soil pH may range from strongly acid to circum neutral
(Warners 1993, Curtis 1959, Costello 1939).

These systems often occur as large wetland complexes comprised of
northern emergent marsh, northern wet meadow (sedge meadow), northern
fen (boreal rich fen), northern shrub thicket and swamp forest (rich
conifer swamp, northern swamp, hardwood-conifer swamp). Northern wet
meadow and northern fen (sedge meadow) may occur along streams and the
grade into northern shrub thicket and swamp forest (Curtis 1959). On the
edges of inland lakes, northern wet meadow often borders emergent marsh
and less frequently northern fen. These wetland communities may also
occur along the Great Lakes shoreline within extensive areas of Great
Lakes marsh.

Vegetation Description

These wetland systems may include emergent marsh, northern wet meadow,
northern fen, northern shrub thicket and swamp forest (MNFI 2003).

Northern wet meadow is a sedge-dominated system that typically has 100%
vegetative cover in the ground layer (Eggers and Reed 1997, Curtis
1959). Sedge meadow is often dominated by *Carex stricta* (tussock
sedge) (Kost and De Steven 2000, Warners 1997, Curtis 1959, Costello
1936, Stout 1914). Because the roots of *Carex stricta* form large
hummocks or tussocks, the species is often responsible for the
community's hummock and hollow structure. Individual culms of *Carex
stricta* grow from the tussocks, which may reach more than one meter in
height and half a meter in diameter and live for more than 50yrs
(Costello 1936). The *Carex stricta* tussocks can occur at very high
densities (1-4 per m2) and occupy more than 40% of a meadow's area
(Costello 1936). Because the shaded areas between tussocks are often
covered with standing water and leaf litter, many of the shorter species
inhabiting sedge meadows grow almost exclusively from the sides or tops
of *Carex stricta* tussocks.

Other sedges that commonly occur in northern wet meadow include: *Carex
aquatilis* (water sedge), *C. bebbii* (Bebb's sedge), *C. buxbaumii*
(Buxbaum's sedge), *C. comosa* (long-hair sedge), *C. hystericina*
(bottlebrush sedge), *C. lacustris* (lake or hairy sedge), *C.
lanuginose* (woolly sedge), *C. lasiocarpa* (wiregrass sedge), *C.
rostrata* (beaked sedge), *C. stipata* (saw-beak sedge), *C. vesicaria*
(blister sedge), and *C. vulpinoidea* (fox sedge). Although most of the
associated sedge species tend to be randomly interspersed, *Carex
lacustris*, *C. lasiocarpa*, *C. rostrate*, and *C. vesicaria* can often
occur as dominants or co-dominants.

The most dominant grass species in northern wet meadow is *Calamagrostis
canadensis* (blue-joint grass) (Kost and De Steven 2000, Stout 1914).
Other common grasses include: *Bromus ciliatus* (fringed brome),
*Glyceria canadensis* (manna grass), *G. striata* (fowl manna grass),
*Muhlenbergia glomerata* (marsh wild timothy), *Muhlenbergia mexicana*
(leafy satin grass), and *Poa palustris* (fowl meadow grass).
Spike-rushes (i.e., *Eleocharis erythropoda*), cat-tails (*Typha
latifolia* and *Typha angustifolia*), *Cladium marisicoides* (twig-rush)
and *Scirpus atrovirens* (green bulrush) are also common graminoids.
Sedge meadows disturbed by agricultural use, grazing, drainage and/or
filling are frequently dominated by *Phalaris arundinaceae* (reed canary
grass), an extremely aggressive grass that forms persistent, monotypic
stands (Eggers and Reed 1997).

A wide variety of wetland forbs occur scattered in northern wet meadow.
Due to the high moisture conditions during the spring, many of the forbs
bloom in the summer and fall (Curtis 1959). The following are some of
the more common species: *Anemone canadensis* (Canada anemone),
*Asclepias incarnata* (swamp milkweed), *Aster lanceolatus* (panicled
aster), *A. lateriflorus* (calico aster), *A. puniceus* (swamp aster),
*A. umbellatus* (flat-topped aster), *Campanula aparinoides* (marsh
bellflower), *Cicuta bulbifera* (water-hemlock), *C. maculata*
(water-hemlock), *Cirsium muticum* (swamp thistle), *Epilobium strictum*
(downy willowherb), *Eupatorium maculatum* (Joe-pye-weed), *Eupatorium
perfoliatum* (boneset), *Euthamia graminifolia* (flat-topped goldenrod),
*Galium asprellum* (rough bedstraw), *G. trifidum* (threepetal
bedstraw), *Impatiens capensis* (spotted touch-me-not), *Iris
versicolor* (wild blue flag), *Lathyrus palustris* (marsh pea), *Lycopus
americanus* (American water-horehound), *L. uniflorus* (northern
bugleweed), *Lysimachia thyrsifolia* (tufted loosestrife), *Mentha
arvensis* (wild mint), *Polygonum amphibium* (water smartweed), *Rumex
orbiculatus* (greater water dock), *Sagittaria latifolia* (duck-potato
or common arrowhead), *Scutellaria galericulata* (marsh skullcap),
*Solidago canadensis* (Canada goldenrod), *S. gigantea* (late
goldenrod), *S. patula* (rough-leaved goldenrod or swamp goldenrod),
*Thalictrum dasycarpum* (purple meadow-rue), *Triadenum fraseri* (marsh
St. John's-wort), *Verbena hastata* (blue vervain), and *Viola
cucullata* (marsh violet). Characteristic fern or fern allies include
*Dryopteris cristata* (crested woodfern), *Equisetum arvense* (field
horsetail), *E. fluviatile* (water horsetail), *Onoclea sensibilis*
(sensitive fern), and *Thelypteris palustris* (marsh fern).

Northern wet meadow can also contain numerous, scattered shrub and tree
species. Shrub and tree encroachment is especially pronounced in sites
that have altered flooding or fire regimes. Prevalent shrubs include
*Alnus rugosa* (speckled alder), *Betula pumila* (bog birch), *Cornus
stolonifera* (red-osier dogwood), *Potentilla fruticosa* (shrubby
cinquefoil), *P. palustris* (marsh cinquefoil), *Salix* spp. (willows),
*Spiraea alba* (meadowsweet), and *S. tomentosa* (steeplebush).
Scattered trees and tree saplings are often found invading northern wet
meadow. Typical tree species include *Acer rubrum* (red maple),
*Fraxinus nigra* (black ash), *Larix laricina* (tamarack), *Populus
balsamifera* (balsam poplar), *Populus tremuloides* (quaking aspen), and
*Thuja occidentalis* (northern white cedar). (Above species lists
compiled from Michigan Natural Features Inventory database, NatureServe
2005a, Faber-Langendoen 2001, Eggers and Reed 1997, Reuter 1986, Curtis
1959).

Northern shrub thicket vegetation is characterized by an overwhelming
dominance of speckled alder, which forms dense (often monotypic)
thickets with canopy coverage ranging between 40-95% and stand height
typically between 1-3m. The community exhibits a high degree of
floristic homogeneity due to the dominance of alder. Floristic diversity
is usually correlated with the degree of shrub canopy closure, with more
diversity being found in the more open sites. The understory, which is
comprised of species from both meadow and forest, is dominated by an
array of short shrubs, forbs, grasses, sedges and ferns. Prevalent herbs
of northern shrub thickets include: *Aster puniceus* (swamp aster),
*Caltha palustris* (marsh marigold), *Campanula aparinoides* (marsh
bellflower), *Eupatorium maculatum* (Joe-pye-weed), *E. perfoliatum*
(boneset), *Galium asprellum* (rough bedstraw), *Impatiens capensis*
(spotted touch-me-not), *Iris versicolor* (wild blue flag), *Lycopus
uniflorus* (northern bugleweed or water-horehound), *Mentha arvensis*
(wild mint), *Mimulus ringens* (monkey-flower), *Scutellaria
galericulata* (marsh skullcap), *S. lateriflora* (mad-dog skullcap),
*Senecio aureus* (golden ragwort), *Solidago canadensis* (Canada
goldenrod), *S. gigantea* (late goldenrod), *S. rugosa* (rough-leaved
goldenrod), *Symplocarpus foetidus* (skunk cabbage), and *Thalictrum
dasycarpum* (purple meadow-rue). Characteristic ferns and fern allies
include *Equisetum arvense* (field horsetail), *Onoclea sensibilis*
(sensitive fern), *Osmunda cinnamomea* (cinnamon fern), *O. regalis*
(royal fern), and *Thelypteris palustris* (marsh fern). Short shrubs
include *Myrica gale* (wax-myrtle or bayberry), *Potentilla palustris*
(marsh cinquefoil), *Ribes americanum* (wild black currant), *Rubus
hispidus* (swamp dewberry), *R. pubescens* (dwarf raspberry), *R.
strigosus* (wild red raspberry), and *Spirea alba* (meadowsweet). Where
alder does not form a monospecific shrub layer, associates of the tall
shrub layer can include *Aronia prunifolia* (chokeberry), *Betula
pumila* (bog birch), *Cornus amomum* (silky dogwood), *C. stolonifera*
(red-osier dogwood), *Ilex verticilata* (winterberry), *Salix bebbiana*
(Bebb's willow), *S. discolor* (pussy willow), *S. exigua* (sandbar
willow), *S. petiolaris* (slender willow), *Viburnum cassinoides*
(wild-raisin), and *V. opulus* (highbush-cranberry). Scattered trees and
tree saplings are often found invading northern shrub thickets. Typical
tree species include balsam fir, red maple, black ash, tamarack, black
spruce, balsam poplar, quaking aspen and white pine and northern white
cedar.

BpS Dominant and Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**              **Common Name**
  ------------ -------------------------------- -----------------------------
  CAST8        *Carex stricta*                  Upright sedge

  CACA4        *Calamagrostis canadensis*       Bluejoint

  THOC2        *Thuja occidentalis*             Arborvitae

  CALA11       *Carex lasiocarpa*               Woollyfruit sedge

  SALA2        *Sagittaria latifolia*           Broadleaf arrowhead

  ALIN2        *Alnus incana*                   Gray alder

  BEPU4        *Betula pumila*                  Bog birch
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Species names are from the NRCS PLANTS database. Check species codes at
http://plants.usda.gov.

Disturbance Description

These wetland systems are groundwater-dependent. Water levels fluctuate
seasonally, reaching their peak in spring and lows in late summer
(Warners 1993, Costello 1936,). However, water levels typically remain
at or near the soil's surface throughout the year (Eggers and Reed 1997,
Warners 1993, Curtis 1959, Costello 1936). For northern wet meadows, in
addition to seasonal flooding, beaver-induced flooding may also play an
important role in maintaining the community by occasionally raising
water levels and killing encroaching trees and shrubs. Beaver may also
help create new northern wet meadows by flooding swamp forests and
northern shrub thickets and thus creating suitable habitat for the
growth of shade-intolerant wet meadow species.

Evidence from wetland peat cores and circa 1800 vegetation maps indicate
that wet meadow is a fire-dependent natural community (Davis 1979,
Curtis 1959). Analysis of wetland peat cores shows that charcoal
fragments are consistently associated with sedge and grass pollen (Davis
1979). Conversely, charcoal fragments are lacking from sections of peat
cores dominated by shrub pollen. Fires typically occur in sedge meadows
during dry conditions of early spring or late fall (White 1965). By
reducing leaf litter and allowing light to reach the soil surface and
stimulate seed germination, fire can play an important role in
maintaining wet meadow seed banks (Kost and De Steven 2000, Warners
1997). Fire also plays a critical role in preventing declines in species
richness in many community types by creating micro-niches for small
species (Leach and Givnish 1996). In the absence of fire, a thick layer
of leaf litter can develop that stifles seedling establishment and seed
bank expression. Another critically important attribute of fire for
maintaining open sedge meadow is its ability to temporarily reduce shrub
cover (Hoffman 2002, Reuter 1986, White 1965). In the absence of fire or
flooding, all but the wettest sedge meadows typically convert to shrub
thicket and eventually swamp forest (Curtis 1959). Because many of the
species that inhabit wet meadow are shade-intolerant, species richness
usually declines following shrub and tree invasion (Reuter 1986, White
1965, Curtis 1959).

Fire Frequency

Fire interval is expressed in years for each fire severity class and for
all types of fire combined (All Fires). Average FI is the central
tendency modeled. Percent of all fires is the percent of all fires
modeled in that severity class. Minimum and Maximum FIs show the
relative range of fire intervals as estimated by model contributors, if
known.

Scale Description

None

Adjacency or Identification Concerns

These communities may occur within depressions surrounded by either
fire-dependent uplands such as pine barrens, oak-pine barrens, and mixed
pine systems (dry- and dry-mesic northern forest) or systems in which
fire is thought to be very infrequent such as northern mesic forest
(northern hardwood forest - sugar maple, American beech, basswood and
eastern hemlock). Thus, fire frequency within the graminoid-dominated
wetlands is strongly influenced by vegetation composition of adjacent
uplands.

Issues or Problems

The timeframe of the model (1,000yrs) does not allow for an adequate
description of hydrarch succession. Also, the diversity of herbaceous
wetland communities is not fully described within the models created for
MZs 41, 50, and 51.

Native Uncharacteristic Conditions

Comments

# Succession Classes {#succession-classes .Report_Section}

**Mapping Rules**

Succession class letters A-E are described in the Succession Class
Description section. Some classes use a leafform distinction where a
qualifier is added to the class letter: Brdl (broadleaf), Con (conifer),
or Mix (mixed conifer and broadleaf). UN refers to uncharacteristic
native or a combination of height and cover that would not be expected
under the reference condition. NP refers to not possible or a
combination of height and cover which is not physiologically possible
for the species in the BpS.

**Description**

Class A 7 Early Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name** **Common Name**       **Canopy
                                                         Position**
  ------------ ------------------- --------------------- -----------------
  SALA2        Sagittaria          Broadleaf arrowhead   Lower
               latifolia                                 

  POCO14       Pontederia cordata  Pickerelweed          Lower

  TYLA         Typha latifolia     Broadleaf cattail     Lower

  CAST8        Carex stricta       Upright sedge         Lower
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class represents a beaver meadow with emergent marsh vegetation.
This is an early seral stage with open water and emergent vegetation
such as *Sagittaria latifolia*, *Pontedaria cordata*, *Nuphar
variegata*, *Carex stricta*, and *Typha latifolia*. Absence of flooding
can be caused by periodic drought or local extirpation of beaver due to
trapping or predation by wolves.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class B 57 Late Development 1 - Open

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                            Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ ------------------- ----------------
  CAST8        Carex stricta            Upright sedge       Lower

  CACA4        Calamagrostis canadensis Bluejoint           Lower

  CAAQ         Carex aquatilis          Water sedge         Lower

  EUMA6        Eupatorium maculatum     Spotted joepyeweed  Lower
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class represents sedge-dominated northern wet meadow (northern
sedge meadow) and northern fen (boreal rich fen), which is dominated by
*Carex stricta* or *Carex lasiocarpa* and other sedges along with
bluejoint grass (*Calamagrostis canadensis*), and other grasses, rushes,
and forbs. Frequent replacement fires and seasonal flooding help to
maintain open conditions and structural and species diversity.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class C 31 Late Development 2 - Closed

Indicator Species

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**      **Common Name**      **Canopy
                                                             Position**
  ------------ ------------------------ -------------------- ----------------
  ALIN2        Alnus incana             Gray alder           Middle

  BEPU4        Betula pumila            Bog birch            Middle

  ILVE         Ilex verticillata        Common winterberry   Middle

  CACA4        Calamagrostis canadensis Bluejoint            Lower
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

Northern shrub thicket, a type dominated by tag alder (*Alnus incana*).
Other shrubs such as bog birch (*Betula pumila*), Michigan holly (*Ilix
veticillata*), and meadow sweet (*Spirea alba*). The ground layer of
shrub-carr is typically diverse with a mix of wet meadow and forested
wetland vegetation. Many of the sedges formerly abundant continue to be
present but in a relatively suppressed condition due to the lower light
levels under the cover of alder and other shrubs. In the absence of
beaver flooding, trees become established and the community succeeds to
swamp forest.

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*None

Class D 5 Late Development 3 - Closed

Indicator Species

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**   **Scientific Name**    **Common Name**     **Canopy
                                                          Position**
  ------------ ---------------------- ------------------- ------------------
  THOC2        Thuja occidentalis     Arborvitae          Upper

  FRNI         Fraxinus nigra         Black ash           Upper

  PIST         Pinus strobus          Eastern white pine  Upper

  BEAL2        Betula alleghaniensis  Yellow birch        Upper
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description

This class represents swamp forest, which is typically dominated by
conifers, especially northern white-cedar (*Thuja occidentalis*).
However, hardwoods or a mix of both hardwoods and conifers may be
dominant including tamarack (*Larix laricina*), white pine (*Pinus
strobus*), black ash (*Fraxinus nigra*), American elm (*Ulmus
americana*), red maple (*Acer rubrum*) and yellow birch (*Betula
allegheniensis*).

*[Maximum Tree Size Class]{.underline}*Medium 9-21\"DBH

# Model Parameters {#model-parameters .Report_Section}

Deterministic Transitions

Probabilistic Transitions

Optional Disturbances

Optional 1: severe beaver flooding

Optional 2: less severe beaver flooding

# References {#references .Report_Section}

Cleland, D.T.; Freeouf, J.A.; Keys, J.E.; Nowacki, G.J.; Carpenter,
C.A.; and McNab, W.H. 2007. Ecological Subregions: Sections and
Subsections for the conterminous United States. Gen. Tech. Report WO-76D
\[Map on CD-ROM\] (A.M. Sloan, cartographer). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, presentation scale 1:
3,500,000; colored

Cohen, J.G. and M.A. Kost. 2005. Natural community abstract for northern
wet meadow. Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 8 pp.

Costello, D.F. 1936. Tussock meadows in southeastern Wisconsin.
Botanical Gazette. 97: 610-48.

Curtis, J.T. 1959. Vegetation of Wisconsin: An Ordination of Plant
Communities. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 657 pp.

Davis, A.M. 1979. Wetland succession, fire and the pollen record: A
Midwestern example. The American Midland Naturalist. 102: 86-94.

Eggers, S.D. and D.M. Reed. 1997. Wetland plants and plant communities
of Minnesota and Wisconsin. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, St Paul,
Minnesota. 263 pp.

Faber-Langendoen, D., editor. 2001. Plant communities of the Midwest:
Classification in an ecological context. Association for Biodiversity
Information, Arlington, VA. 61 pp. plus appendix (705 pp).

Hammerson, G. 1994. Beaver (Castor canadensis): Ecosystem alterations,
management, and monitoring. Natural Areas Journal. 14(1): 44-57.

Huenneke, L.F. and P.L. Marks. 1987. Stem dynamics of the shrub Alnus
incana spp. Rugosa: Transition matrix model. Ecology. 68(5): 1234-1242.

Jean, M. and A. Bouchard. 1991. Temporal changes in wetland landscapes
of a section of the St. Lawrence River, Canada. Environmental
Management. 15(2): 241-250.

Kost, M.A. 2001. Natural community abstract for southern wet meadow.
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 5 pp.

Kost, M.A. and D. De Steven. 2000. Plant community responses to
prescribed burning in Wisconsin sedge meadows. Natural Areas Journal.
20: 36-49.

Leach, M.K. and T.J. Givnish. 1996. Ecological determinants of species
loss in remnant prairies. Science. 273: 1555-1558.

Michigan Natural Features Inventory. 2003. Draft description of Michigan
natural community types. (Unpublished manuscript revised March 4, 2003.)
Michigan Natural Features Inventory, Lansing, MI. 36 pp. Available:
http://www.msue.msu.edu/mnfi/lists/natural_community_types.pdf.

NatureServe. 2005a. NatureServe Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life
\[web application\]. NatureServe, Arlington, VA.
http://www.natureserve.org/explorer.

NatureServe. 2005b. International Ecological Classification Standard:
Terrestrial Ecological Classifications. NatureServe Central Databases.
Arlington, VA.

Ohmann, L.F., M.D. Knighton and R. McRoberts. 1990. Influence of
flooding duration on the biomass growth of alder and willow. Research
Paper NC-292. St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest
Experiment Station. 5 pp.

Parker, G.R. and G. Schneider. 1974. Structure and edaphic factors of an
alder swamp in northern Michigan. Canadian Journal of Forestry Research.
4: 499-508.

Reuter, D.D. 1986. Sedge meadows of the upper Midwest: A stewardship
summary. Natural Areas Journal. 6(4): 27-34.

Stout, A.B. 1914. A biological and statistical analysis of the
vegetation of a typical wild hay meadow. Transactions of the Wisconsin
Academy of Sciences, Arts, and Letters 17: 405-57.

Van Deelen, T.R. 1991. Alnus rugosa. In: Fire Effects Information
System, \[Online\]. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory. http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.

Vogl, R.J. 1969. One hundred and thirty years of plant succession in a
southeastern Wisconsin lowland. Ecology. 50: 248-55.

Warners, D.P. 1993. Species diversity in southern Michigan sedge
meadows. Unpublished report to The Nature Conservancy, Michigan Chapter,
East Lansing, MI. 35 pp.

Warners, D.P. 1997. Plant diversity in sedge meadows: effects of
groundwater and fire. PhD dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI. 231 pp.

White, K.L. 1965. Shrub-carrs of southeastern Wisconsin. Ecology. 46:
286-304.
